The Evolution of Health Plans 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• define “managed care” and “health plan,”  identify three key factors in the evolution of health plans, 
• discuss how health plans have responded to the problems of high healthcare costs and reduced access to health coverage, and  
• list some of the components included in today’s definition of quality in health plans. 
You have no doubt heard the terms “health plan,” “managed care,” and perhaps also “healthcare management.” They are used in various ways, but in general they denote systems that integrate the delivery and financing of healthcare, various techniques used to manage the delivery and financing of healthcare, and organizations that employ these techniques. For the purposes of this course, we will define managed care (healthcare management) as the integration of the delivery and financing of healthcare within a system, plan, or organization that seeks to manage healthcare costs, access, and quality. Such a system, plan, or organization is referred to as a health plan, also called a managed care plan or managed care organization (MCO). 
What exactly does it mean to “integrate the delivery and financing of healthcare”? And how does a health plan manage healthcare costs, access, and quality? We answer these questions and many others in this course. We begin in this first module with an overview of how health plans have developed and the factors that affect their continued evolution. Note that in this first module we introduce a number of terms and concepts that may not be familiar to you—they will be explained in detail in the modules that follow.  

An Important Note on the Affordable Care Act (ACA) 
In March 2010 Congress enacted the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), more commonly called the Affordable Care Act (ACA) or simply referred to as healthcare reform. This legislation brings about major changes in our country’s healthcare financing system, including health plans, and we address it in this course: 
 In course modules, as we cover various aspects of health plans, we discuss provisions of ACA that will have an impact in those areas. 
 Near the end of the course, we offer an overview of ACA, explaining in broad terms how it will change the healthcare system and its impact on health plans. 
We emphasize two points: 
 The discussion of ACA in this course is not comprehensive. We briefly describe in general terms the main components of this very complex and lengthy legislation, with a focus on the elements that affect health plans. We do not cover all of the provisions of the legislation, which is hundreds of pages long, and for the provisions that we do address, we do not include all details and exceptions.  
 The new system and rules are evolving. Many details and important matters still remain to be decided as the law is interpreted, clarified, and implemented over the next few years. This module is based on what is known in late 2010. Students are encouraged to visit our website (www.ahip.org.) for developments. 

The Development of Health Plans 
We think of managed care and health plans as modern developments, but in fact early versions have existed since the beginning of the 20th century. A few historical milestones: 
• 1910. The earliest examples of health plans appeared in the form of prepaid group practices. These were healthcare systems in which plan members paid a monthly premium and in return received a wide range of medical services through an exclusive group of providers. 
• 1929. Blue Cross plans providing prepaid hospital care were established. 
• 1930. Blue Shield plans providing reimbursement for physician services were established. 
• 1954. Individual practice associations (IPAs), which contracted with physicians in independent fee-for-service practices, emerged as a competitive response to health maintenance organizations (HMOs), which were based on group practices. 
For many years health plans accounted for only a small fraction of all health coverage. But in recent decades they have grown dramatically, and they now cover a large portion of the U.S. population. There have been many reasons for this growth, but we will focus on three key factors: the HMO Act of 1973, consumer and employer demand, and government involvement. 
The HMO Act of 1973 
One of the most important causes of the expansion of health plans was the federal Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973. This legislation was designed to reduce the cost of healthcare by increasing competition in the health coverage market and to increase access to health coverage for individuals without insurance or with only limited benefits. The main features of the HMO Act are:  
• Federal qualification. HMOs were given the option of becoming federally qualified. To do so, they had to meet a number of standards related to minimum benefit packages, provider network adequacy, enrollee grievance systems, financial stability, and quality assurance. 
• Dual choice. Employers that offered indemnity health insurance to more than 25 employees had to also offer a federally qualified HMO (if an HMO requested it).  
• Federal funding. To encourage their development, grants and loans were made available to federally qualified HMOs. Funding could be used to expand the service area of an existing HMO or establish a new HMO. 
• State law exemption. Federally qualified HMOs were exempted from state laws that restricted their development. 
Although federal qualification was optional, many HMOs sought it because of the advantages mentioned above and because it could be cited as a “stamp of approval” in marketing. But on the other hand, in some ways it weakened the competitive position of qualified HMOs, since they had to meet the federal standards and traditional indemnity insurance or other health plans did not.  
From 1976 to 1996, the HMO Act was modified by a series of amendments. These gave health plans more flexibility in designing and marketing products and increased the emphasis on quality. Many of the standards for federally qualified HMOs were reduced or eliminated, and the dual choice mandate was repealed in 1995. 
The HMO Act played a major role in the early establishment and growth of HMOs, and although federally qualified status no longer carries the weight it had previously, some HMOs still maintain it. 
Consumer and Employer Demand  
HMOs had significant success in containing healthcare costs and holding down premium increases, and by the early 1990s consumers and employers sponsoring health coverage had come to embrace them. But a traditional HMO required members to receive healthcare only from providers affiliated with the plan (that is, in the plan’s network), and consumers became dissatisfied with this restriction. They wanted the lower cost of an HMO but more leeway in choosing providers. New health plan types were developed to address this demand. Two of the most important were PPOs and POS products. 
• Preferred provider organizations (PPOs) like HMOs, have a network of providers. But unlike traditional HMOs, they cover services delivered by nonnetwork providers, although the member pays a greater share of costs than for network care (typically higher copayments or coinsurance). And while traditional HMOs require members to obtain a referral from their primary care physician to see a specialist, PPOs generally do not.  
• Point-of-service (POS) products combine elements of traditional indemnity insurance with elements of health plans. Members do not have to choose how they receive services until they use them and may obtain care from network providers and/or non-network providers. However, as with a PPO, members pay more for out-of-network care. Visits to specialists may require a referral from a primary care physician. 
Consumers also wanted coverage of specialty healthcare, such as dental care, vision care, behavioral health, and prescription drugs, and employers wanted more costeffective ways of providing such benefits. In response, health plans developed specialty “carve-out” plans and products with specialized provider networks. Specialty coverage may be integrated into a comprehensive health plan or offered as stand-alone product. 
Around the beginning of the new century, health premiums began to go up again, and consumers and employers looked for new solutions. One approach is consumerdirected health plans (CDHPs). CDHPs are based on employer funding of a core set of benefits, employee financial responsibility, and increased accountability of the health plan and providers. Under a CDHP, the individual has both a health insurance plan with a high annual deductible and a tax-advantaged health savings account. He or she uses money from the account to pay for healthcare expenses before the high deductible of the health plan is satisfied, as well as other out-of-pocket healthcare costs, generally on a tax-free basis. This approach both makes possible a low premium and gives consumers an incentive to make prudent healthcare choices, as they pay much of the cost themselves. 
These and other health plan types and products will be discussed in the modules that follow.  
Government Involvement 
Government has long been involved in health insurance, at both the state and federal levels. For over a century, states have regulated insurance companies, including health insurers. They mandate or prohibit certain policy provisions, impose financial requirements, oversee sales and marketing, and enforce many other rules. The federal government has historically taken a secondary role, but it does enact legislation that affects insurers and health plans. As we saw, in 1973 Congress enacted the HMO Act. In 1996 it passed the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), which included a wide variety of requirements for health plans. And most recently, in March 2010, the Affordable Care Act (ACA), commonly referred to as healthcare reform, was enacted. This legislation will have a major impact on healthcare and health plans in the years to come. 
The government plays another important role in health plans—it is a major purchaser of health coverage, financing healthcare for millions of Americans through several programs. In 1965 the Medicare program for the elderly and disabled and Medicaid for the poor were established, followed in 1997 by the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). And the federal and state governments have long sponsored health coverage for millions of government employees and members of the military and their families. Government health coverage programs have helped drive the growth of health plans by increasingly turning to them as alternatives to traditional indemnity insurance. By 2010 approximately 11.1 million Medicare beneficiaries (24 percent) were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage health plan, 1 and about 70 percent of Medicaid enrollees received some or all of their healthcare through managed care.2 
Current Factors in the Evolution of Health Plans 
Now let’s turn our attention to current trends. The most important is the steady rise in healthcare costs. This has made it necessary for health insurance premiums to be increased, and that in turn has made it harder for employers and consumers to afford coverage. Health plans have responded to these problems with a number of solutions.  
Rising Healthcare Costs 
Spending on healthcare in the United States has been rising for many years, surpassing $2.3 trillion in 2008. This is more than three times the $714 billion spent in 1990 and about nine times the $253 billion spent in 1980. In 2008 U.S. healthcare spending was about $7,681 per resident and accounted for 16.2 percent of the nation’s Gross 
Domestic Product.3 What is driving this increase? Let’s look at some key factors. 
Technological and Pharmacological Advances 
New tests and treatments involving technology are constantly being developed, and new drugs are being invented. These advances have enabled doctors to prevent, cure, or manage a variety of medical conditions, allowing many people who just a few years ago might have died or lived with pain or severe limitations to live normal lives. But in many cases they are extremely expensive, and this has been a major component of cost increases. 
Demographic Changes 
The percentage of the U.S. population 65 or older continues to rise dramatically, and of course older people need more medical care than younger people. They frequently have chronic diseases that require ongoing treatment, medication, and therapy, and they often need nursing home care or home healthcare. And a very substantial portion of healthcare spending goes to people in their last few months of life, when long hospital stays (often in intensive care), multiple operations, and the use of technology are common.  
This increase in the elderly population will only accelerate with the aging of the Baby Boom generation, those born in the two decades after World War II. Birth rates were high in those years, so there are considerably more people in this age group than in younger or older generations. These people are now in late middle age, and in the next few years the oldest of them will begin to turn 65, creating a bulge in the elderly population and an increase in the need for medical care. 
Overutilization and Incentives 
Another major cause of high healthcare spending is unnecessary medical services. Many physicians, hospitals, and other healthcare providers are still compensated under the fee-for-service approach. This means that the more services they deliver, the more they get paid—in other words, in most situations they have a strong financial incentive to provide additional services, even when it is doubtful that these services are needed or useful. This problem is exacerbated by the fear of malpractice suits, which drives providers to order unnecessary tests and treatments just to make sure no one can accuse them of not doing everything conceivably possible. This is known as defensive medicine. 
Other Factors 
Commentators have pointed out a few other trends that contribute to higher healthcare spending. More Americans are overweight and physically inactive than in the past, leading to diseases such as diabetes and heart disease and to overall poor health. Some believe that widespread advertising of prescription drugs is creating an inflated demand for some products.  
The Uninsured 
As mentioned above, to cover greater healthcare costs health plans are forced to raise premiums—otherwise they would go out of business. This has made health coverage less affordable, both for employers and individuals. Businesses have had to stop sponsoring coverage or shift a larger share of the premium to employees. As a result, many people of modest means cannot afford health coverage. These people often wait until a medical condition becomes severe and then seek care in a hospital emergency room, and they do not receive ongoing treatment or screening for diseases. This drives healthcare costs even higher.  
The Response of Health Plans 
Health plans have sought to address the problems of high premiums and reduced access to coverage in various ways. 
• Provider compensation. Managed care generally seeks to replace fee-forservice compensation, which as we have seen gives healthcare providers incentives to deliver more services than may be necessary. Health plans use capitation and other compensation methods under which providers have incentives to avoid excessive services. Health plans are also able to negotiate lower payments to providers in exchange for supplying them with a large volume of patients. In this course we will study in detail health plan compensation of providers. 
• Management techniques. Health plans use a number of approaches to ensure that plan members are cared for in the most effective and cost-efficient way. Health plans emphasize preventing illnesses (much less costly than treating them). Utilization management is employed to ensure that the services patients receive are appropriate to their needs. Case management coordinates care to avoid overlapping services from different providers. Disease management helps patients with chronic conditions maintain their health and avoid serious episodes.  
• Consumer-directed health plans. CDHPs, described above, address high costs in two ways. Because they have high deductibles, insurers pay less in benefits and so can charge a lower premium, making them affordable to more people. And because individuals pay for their own care until they satisfy the annual deductible (which is typically a few thousand dollars), they have an incentive to use healthcare services wisely, not seeking care when it is not needed and choosing competitively priced providers and products. 
 Technology. A high priority of health plans is to reduce administrative costs in order to hold down premiums. One of the best ways of doing so is using technology to perform such functions as processing and paying claims, billing, enrolling new members, generating member identification cards, and maintaining information. Handling these operations electronically rather than manually lowers costs by reducing staffing requirements and improves quality and customer service by increasing accuracy and shortening processing time. Health plans are now expanding their use of automation into areas beyond core functions—for example, electronic medical records.  
Quality 
So far we have talked mostly about costs. But another important element in the evolution of health plans is quality. In the past quality was often narrowly measured in terms of the scope of services provided for a certain cost. Today quality is evaluated more broadly and includes such components as desired outcomes, preventive care, access to physicians (both primary and specialty care), patient satisfaction, and care for chronic illnesses.  
The Role of Employers 
Historically, employer-sponsored health coverage was traditional indemnity insurance. There were no networks, and employees were generally free to go to any healthcare provider they chose, so it was up to them to make judgments and decisions about provider quality. But as premiums rose, employers took a more active role in evaluating and selecting health plans for their employees, and in doing so they considered not only costs and services covered but a number of quality measures. Some employers have joined together to form purchasing coalitions to bargain more effectively for the lowest-cost and highest-quality healthcare.  
The Role of Accreditation 
Health plans have responded to the demand for quality by establishing quality management programs. They have also sought to demonstrate the quality of their operations to consumers, employers, and government agencies by obtaining accreditation from independent agencies. Two of the best known accrediting bodies are NCQA and URAC.  
 NCQA (the National Committee on Quality Assurance) has been accrediting health plans since 1991. Its mission is “to improve the quality of health care… through measurement, transparency, and accountability.”4 NCQA focuses on measuring results and sharing the information with consumers and the market. NCQA has also developed a variety of quality measurement tools, including the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). The large majority of  health plans use HEDIS to measure performance on important aspects of healthcare and service. 
 URAC (formerly the Utilization Review Accreditation Commission, now simply URAC) was originally formed to evaluate utilization review processes, but it has expanded into evaluating health plans and other healthcare entities. The stated mission of URAC is “to promote continuous improvements in the quality and efficiency of healthcare management through processes of accreditation and education.”5 
Quality management and accreditation (including NCQA and URAC) are discussed in more detail later in the course. 
Notes 
                                                          
1
  Kaiser Family Foundation. June 2010. “Medicare Advantage 2010 Data Spotlight—Plan Enrollment Patterns and Trends.” 
2
  Kaiser Commission. February 2010. “Medicaid and the Uninsured, Medicaid and Managed Care—Key Data, Trends, and Issues. 
3
  Kaiser Family Foundation, Health Research and Educational Trust. September 2009. “Employer Health Benefits 2009 Annual Survey.” 
                                                                                                                                                                             
4
  NCQA. www.ncqa.org. 5
 URAC. www.urac.org.  

2 	Basic Concepts of Health Insurance 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• define insurance and indemnity health insurance;  define risk, underwriting, and pricing; 
• explain fee-for-service compensation and deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments; and  identify the main cost control methods used by indemnity health insurance.  
Until the last few decades, most health coverage in the United States was indemnity insurance. Before we begin to learn about today’s health plans, it is important to understand some basic concepts of this traditional coverage. Why? Some health plans still retain certain characteristics of indemnity insurance, and many health plan designs and features were developed to address problems in indemnity insurance. Insurance 
Insurance is a way of protecting against the risk of financial loss. An individual or business enters into a contract with an insurance company by purchasing an insurance policy. The person or business pays a relatively small, fixed amount (a premium) to the insurer at regular intervals (such as monthly or yearly). In exchange, if the person or business incurs a financial loss covered by the insurance policy, the insurer makes a payment (a benefit) or payments  to cover or help cover this loss. (The insurer is said to “indemnify” the insured against the loss, hence indemnity insurance.) 
Insurance enables people to protect themselves against the possibility of losing a large, unpredictable amount of money by paying much smaller, set amounts over time. For instance, a homeowner can pay annual fire insurance premiums of a few hundred dollars so that if her home burns down she will not have to pay hundreds of thousands of dollars to replace it. 
In indemnity health insurance, if a person covered by a policy (an insured) incurs medical expenses covered by the policy, the insurer pays benefits to pay those expenses or reimburse for them. By paying monthly premiums, the insured protects herself against the risk of having to pay thousands, or tens of thousands, of dollars for treatment of a serious illness out of her own pocket.  
Individual and Group Insurance 
Insurance can take the form of individual or group coverage. In individual insurance a private person buys a policy from an insurer. He is the policyholder (the party to the insurance contract), he pays the premium, and he (and in some cases his dependents) are insured. In group insurance a business buys a policy that covers its employees, or an association or union buys a policy for its members. The policyholder is the business, association, or union; the employees or members and often their dependents are insured; and while employees or members may pay all or part of the premiums, they do so through the policyholder. 
Risk and Underwriting 
Risk 
In insurance, risk is the possibility of a covered financial loss. In health insurance, it is the possibility (or probability) that a person will incur a healthcare expense covered by the policy. While it is usually impossible to predict if and when a particular individual will need healthcare and how much that care will cost, it is possible to project with reasonable accuracy how much care will be needed by a sizable group of people over a certain period. Heath insurance works by bringing together such a group and collecting enough from them in premiums to pay for the care of those group members who need it. 
To charge enough in premiums to cover benefits (and other costs), an insurer must be able to predict the loss rate for a population of insureds—how much the insurer will pay in benefits. Insurers are able to project loss rates by looking at past populations of insureds with similar characteristics (age, gender, occupation, location, etc.), the illnesses and injuries they suffered, and the amount of medical expenses they incurred. 
Underwriting and Pricing 
Underwriting and pricing (rating) are the processes by which an insurer decides whether to offer a policy to an individual or group, and if so, on what terms and at what premium rate. The insurer seeks to ascertain the risk presented by an applicant, so that it can avoid unacceptable risks and charge a premium rate sufficient to cover the likely loss rate. 
In individual health insurance the underwriter seeks to find out whether the individual applicant has any health conditions or medical history that makes him much more likely than average to need medical care. If a person is very likely to need extensive care in the near future, the insurer may deem him uninsurable and decline to issue a policy. If he presents only a somewhat high risk, the insurer may issue a policy at a higher-thanaverage premium or exclude coverage for a preexisting condition. 
In group insurance the underwriter seeks to determine if the applicant group has any characteristics that make it likely to have a higher-than-average loss rate (see below). 
For large groups the underwriter may look at the group’s past health insurance claims as an indication of its future loss rate. If group’s loss rate is likely to be high, the insurer must charge a higher-than-average premium rate.  
Underwriters must be alert to the possibility of adverse selection (also called antiselection). Adverse selection can occur when people have the option of enrolling in health insurance or not. This happens in the individual market and in group insurance where employees pay all or part of the premium and therefore have the right not to participate. In such cases people who are more likely than average to become ill, because they are older or in poor health, are more likely to choose coverage. If this occurs, the covered group will have a higher-than-average loss rate, and if premiums are based on average loss rates, they may be insufficient to cover benefits. 
Note that the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA), commonly called healthcare reform, will have an important impact on underwriting and pricing. As of 2014 health coverage will generally have to be offered on a guaranteed issue basis—that is, an individual’s current health or medical history cannot be considered in the decision to offer coverage or in setting the premium. Preexisting condition exclusions will not be permitted (effective 2010 for children, 2014 for adults). However, these restrictions apply to broad health coverage; individual medical underwriting will still be used for specialized products such as long-term care insurance. (ACA is discussed in greater detail toward the end of the course.) 
Factors in Group Health Insurance Underwriting 
• Age. Older people of course incur more medical expenses than younger people, so an older-than-average employee group will have a higher-than-average loss rate. 
• Sex. Females incur more medical expenses than males, so an employee group that is majority female will have a higher-than-average loss rate. 
• Occupation/industry. Some occupations and industries involve dangerous activities or unhealthy conditions, and people engaged in them are more likely to suffer injuries or become ill. The loss rate for such employee groups will be high. 
• Location. Medical practices and prices vary from region to region, and costs are generally higher in cities than in rural areas. This may affect the loss rate of a group.  
• Group size. Larger groups spread risk over more people. As a result, larger groups tend to have a loss rate close to the average, while smaller groups are more likely to diverge from the average. 
• Participation. If only a small percentage of eligible employees choose to enroll in a group plan, the risk of adverse selection is high. That is, the insured group will likely include a disproportionate number of people who need healthcare. (For this reason insurers usually will not issue a policy unless a minimum percentage of employees enroll.) Basic Features of Indemnity Health Insurance 
Provider Choice 
In traditional indemnity health insurance, when an insured needs healthcare, she can go to any physician, specialist, hospital, or other healthcare provider she chooses. She does not have to use a provider affiliated with a network, nor will she pay more if she uses a non-network provider, as is the case in some health plans. 
Benefit Payment 
Under an indemnity policy, an insured receives care from a provider, the provider charges her for the services rendered, she submits to her insurer a claim (a request for payment based on the terms of the policy), and the insurer reimburses her. Or more commonly, the insured assigns benefits to the provider—under assignment of benefits, the provider bills the insurer directly, and the insurer reimburses the provider.  
Typically in indemnity insurance, the provider bills the insurer her usual fee for the service she performed, and the insurer pays this amount. This system is known as feefor-service (FFS). There are limits, however—typically, an insurer will not pay a fee considerably higher than the usual and customary charge for the service in the locality. 
Cost-Sharing 
While indemnity insurers generally pay providers’ fees, this does not mean that insurers cover all healthcare costs and insureds pay nothing. Indemnity health insurance policies generally have cost-sharing—insureds must pay a portion of the expenses they incur. In indemnity insurance cost-sharing usually takes the form of a deductible and coinsurance. 
• Deductible. The insured must pay a specified dollar amount of expenses covered by the policy before the insurer begins paying benefits. For instance, if a policy has a $500 annual deductible, each year the insured must pay for the first $500 of covered medical expenses. Once this is done (that is, the deductible is satisfied), the insurer pays benefits for any additional covered expenses for the remainder of the year.  
• Coinsurance. After the deductible is satisfied, the insurer pays a percentage of covered medical expenses, and the insured pays a percentage. For instance, the insured might pay 20 percent coinsurance and the insurer the remaining 80 percent. 
Example: Mark is covered by an indemnity health insurance policy. It has a $500 annual deductible and 20 percent coinsurance. At the beginning of the year, Mark is hospitalized and incurs $5,000 in medical expenses covered by his policy. What amount of these expenses will Mark pay? What amount will the insurer pay? 
Mark pays the first $500 (the deductible). Of the remaining $4,500, he pays 20 percent coinsurance, or $900, for a total of $1,400 dollars. The insurer pays the other $3,600. 
There is another form of cost-sharing, not typical of indemnity insurance but common in health plans—copayments. A copayment is a flat dollar amount a plan member pays for a certain service, not a percentage of the cost of that service. 
Example: Jake is a member of a health plan. Whenever he sees his primary care physician, he makes a $10 copayment. The amount is always $10 regardless of the actual cost of the services the physician provides.  
The purpose of cost-sharing is to hold down the cost of health coverage by reducing the amount the insurer pays in benefits, and also to give insureds an incentive not to use healthcare services unnecessarily. To return to the example of Mark, if he paid no costsharing, he would have no reason not to go to the doctor for every minor complaint and to request as many tests and services as the doctor would provide. But if he has to pay part of the cost of any healthcare services, he is likely to request care only when he really needs it.  
Cost Control 
As the cost of healthcare rose in the late 20th Century, causing health insurance premiums to go up, insurers took various steps to contain costs and hold down premiums. Some of these were successful and have been adopted by health plans, and others laid the groundwork for approaches used today.  
Coordination of Benefits 
A coordination of benefits (COB) provision of a health insurance policy is designed to prevent duplication of benefits when a person is covered by two policies (such as a child whose parents both have employer-sponsored coverage that includes dependents). Under a COB provision, one policy is considered primary and the other is secondary. The primary policy pays all the benefits it normally would, and if there are any expenses not covered by the primary policy but covered by the secondary policy, the secondary policy pays additional benefits. In this way, no benefits in excess of the actual expenses incurred are paid. 
Example: Amelia is covered by both her father’s and her mother’s employersponsored group health insurance policy. Amelia receives healthcare services costing $1,000, all of which are covered by both policies. Her father’s policy has 30 percent coinsurance, so it pays $700. Her mother’s policy has 20 percent coinsurance, so it pays $800. But both policies have COB provisions, and the father’s policy is the primary policy. So the father’s policy pays $700 (the normal benefit), and the mother’s policy pays $100 (the difference between the normal benefit and what has already been paid by the other policy). 
Increased Cost-Sharing 
Increasing deductibles and/or coinsurance has two affects.  
• It shifts healthcare costs from the insurer to the insureds, and because the insurer is paying less in benefits, it can charge a lower premium.  
• It increases the incentive that insureds have not to use healthcare services unnecessarily. This reduces healthcare expenditures, making it possible to hold down premiums. 
Example: Karen is covered by a group indemnity health insurance policy sponsored by her employer. The policy has a $500 annual deductible and 20 coinsurance. The premiums Karen and her employer pay have been increasing significantly every year. In an effort to hold down these increases, the insurer proposes increasing the deductible to $1,000 and coinsurance to 25 percent. Since the insurer will pay less in benefits, it will be able to charge less. So Karen and her employer will pay a lower premium, but Karen will pay more out of her own pocket for healthcare. And because she pays more, she has a greater incentive to seek care only when she really needs it. 
Increases in cost-sharing can be seen as a precursor to consumer-directed health plans, discussed later in this course. These plans have high deductibles, so that insureds have a strong incentive to use healthcare prudently and to choose the most cost-effective providers. 
Cost Containment 
Cost containment measures are designed to lower healthcare expenditures (thereby holding down health insurance benefits and premiums) by ensuring that the medical services provided to insureds are necessary, appropriate, and cost-effective. For instance, before nonemergency surgery is performed, a second opinion from another physician might be sought to make sure that the surgery is necessary and is the most medically effective and cost-effective way to treat the condition. Steps are also taken to see that the most appropriate and cost-effective levels of care and care settings are used—for instance, it may be just as medically effective and safe and much less expensive to perform a certain procedure on an outpatient basis rather than admitting the patient to a hospital. Many other cost-containment strategies, such as utilization management, medical management, and case management, are discussed later in this course. 
Preventive Care and Wellness 
In the past many indemnity health insurance policies did not cover some preventive care services, such as annual checkups, immunizations, and screenings for medical conditions. But it is relatively easy and inexpensive to prevent many conditions or cure them if they are detected early but difficult and expensive to treat them in later stages. Insurers began to realize that it is more cost-effective in the long run to pay for preventive care services and encourage insureds to use them. 
Insurers also began to take note of the correlation between behaviors such as smoking, lack of exercise, and overeating and certain medical conditions. In response, they began to establish wellness programs, which help pay for smoking cessation, fitness, weightloss, and similar programs. As with preventive care, wellness program are cost-effective in the long term. For instance, it costs much less to help an insured pay for a weight-loss program than to treat diabetes later.  
Conclusion 
As healthcare costs increased, companies offering indemnity health insurance took a number of steps to control expenditures and hold down premiums. But these measures did not prove to be sufficient. As a result, types of health coverage that integrate the financing and delivery of healthcare—such as health maintenance organizations (HMOs)—were introduced. And other types of health plans that monitor and control costs and quality in a variety of ways—such as preferred provider organizations (PPOs), point-of-service (POS) options, and managed indemnity plans—were developed. In this course we will explore the array of health plans available today. 

3 	Health Plan Benefits and Networks 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• give examples of health plan types and health plan products;  describe health plan benefits;  define “copayment,” “coinsurance,” and “deductible”; 
• discuss access to care in health plans, including the role of networks and primary care; and  describe briefly utilization management and quality management. 
In this module we will first review and expand on the definition of “health plan” and discuss some basic concepts and characteristics of health plans. Then we will look at health plan products, benefits, and cost-sharing; examine how health plan members access care, including through organized systems of care (networks); and briefly discuss utilization management and quality management. Health Plans 
We noted previously that the term health plan has many meanings. You will recall that we defined a health plan as the integration of the financing and the delivery of healthcare within a system that seeks to manage the cost, access, and quality of care. For this reason health plans may also be called managed care plans or managed care organizations. The term “health plan” may be used to refer to a single organization or to a company that offers several types of health insurance or health plan products. In this course, we will use the term “health plan” to refer to any entity that utilizes certain concepts or techniques to manage the cost, access, and quality of healthcare. 
Just as it is difficult to define a health plan, it is an equally complex task to describe and distinguish among the different types of health plans and health plan products. In some cases, the same term may be used to describe both a type of health plan and a type of health plan product. Examples of health plan types are health maintenance organizations (HMOs), preferred provider organizations (PPOs), and physician-hospital organizations (PHOs). 
Health Plan Products 
In an effort to meet changing customer demand for customization and flexibility of product options, health plans are offering more and different health plan product types and models. In general, there are some basic characteristics that distinguish the different types of products from one another. But product types are becoming less clearly distinguishable from one another, and there few rigid and absolute distinctions among different types. And it is likely that these distinctions will blur even further as the health plan industry continues to evolve. 
Examples of types of health plan products: 
• Health maintenance organizations (HMOs)—plans that typically utilize physicians as gatekeepers. 
• Preferred provider organizations (PPOs)—plans that usually contract at discount prices with physicians. 
• Point-of-service (POS) products—plans in which members do not have to select how to receive services until they use them. 
• Consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs)—plans that combine a health savings account with a high-deductible health insurance plan. 
There are also specialty health plan products for specific types of services and populations. Examples include:  dental HMOs and PPOs,   vision care HMOs and PPOs, 
• Medicare HMOs, and   Medicaid plans. 
Managed Care Techniques 
Health plan products vary in their use of managed care techniques, with a range from highly managed to minimally managed products. The cost-containment techniques described earlier are examples of some ways that health plans manage costs. Other managed care techniques include benefit design and cost-sharing structures, network structure, and various medical management practices (such as prior authorization, second opinions, and case management programs). Figure 3.1 illustrates the managed care continuum. 
Figure 3.1 
The Managed Care Continuum 
The Use of Managed Care Techniques and Concepts Less   	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 More Traditional  	Traditional with 	 	PPO 	 	POS 	 HMO indemnity  	cost-containment health plans  	features All health plan products can be positioned between the two ends of the continuum. The farther to the right on the continuum a health plan is (for instance, an HMO), the more managed care techniques and concepts are practiced by the plan. As you learn more about the different types of plan products, you will begin to understand where each type of plan fits on the continuum. 
Regardless of where a plan product falls on the managed care continuum, all health plans have in common the ultimate goal of accessible, cost-effective, and quality healthcare. 
The Key Players 
There are key participants in health plans. These are organizations and individuals who are involved in the delivery, financing, and consumption of healthcare. The roles of these participants evolve as health plans mature and new types of health plan products are introduced. The key players in health plans include: 
• Providers—individuals and entities that provide healthcare services, such as physicians, nurses, hospitals, and laboratories. 
• Payors—organizations or individuals that finance or reimburse the cost of healthcare services, such as insurance companies, health plans, and the federal government. 
• Purchasers—organizations or individuals that pay the premiums for the healthcare plan, such as employers and individual insureds. 
• Members—individuals who are enrolled in a health plan and for whom the health plan provides healthcare services. 
In health plans, services are delivered through integrated systems of providers and the plans, with all of the key players working together. As we mentioned previously, the roles of these players are changing—roles have begun to overlap, and there are fewer distinctions between the roles of key players. For example, risk bearing (assuming the financial risks associated with the costs of care provided to members) has generally been associated with the payors, such as Medicare and Medicaid and insurance companies. But in coordinated healthcare delivery systems, providers share the role of “risk bearers.” The evolution of roles will certainly continue as health plans and products evolve.  
Health Plan Benefits 
Health plans typically provide a comprehensive benefits package. Health plan benefits (or the services and products that the health plan provides) are generally more extensive than those covered by indemnity insurance. Some typical benefits provided by health plans include: 
hospitalization physician services 
many outpatient services, including mental healthcare emergency care inside and outside the service area prenatal and well child care immunizations periodic health evaluations and examinations diagnostic services and lab test. 
 inpatient and short-term rehabilitation services and physical, occupational, and speech therapy  nursing home care 
The following are some services and terms typically found in plan benefits:  
• Primary care—general medical care, with a focus on preventive care and the diagnosis and treatment of routine injuries and illnesses, which is provided directly to a patient without referral from another physician.  
• Specialty care (secondary care)—medical care delivered by a specialist, including outpatient and inpatient services provided by acute care hospitals. 
• Specialist—a healthcare professional (usually a physician but may also be a dentist or other practitioner) who voluntarily limits her practice to a certain branch of medicine. A specialty may be based on specific services or procedures (such as anesthesia), specific body systems (neurology), certain types of diseases (oncology), or an age group (pediatrics or gerontology).  
• Referral—a recommendation by a physician and/or a health plan for a member to be evaluated and/or treated by a different physician or medical professional, who may be a primary care physician or a specialist. 
• Outpatient services—services provided by a hospital or other healthcare facility without the patient staying overnight. 
• Ancillary services—outpatient or auxiliary services that support the diagnosis and treatment of a patient’s condition; supplemental services needed along with other care. Included are laboratory work, pharmacy services, radiology, physical therapy, medical supplies, and other items. 
Preventive Care 
Health plans focus on improving the health of their members and typically place greater emphasis on preventive care than do indemnity plans. Examples of preventive care services include physical examinations, immunizations, well child care, and routine mammograms. Plans use benefit design to encourage members to utilize preventive care services and to seek care earlier. For example, typically in health plans members pay nothing or very little for preventive services, thereby removing financial barriers to their use. 
Mandated Benefits 
In some cases federal or state laws require that certain services be included in health plan benefits. These are known as mandated benefits. In 1965 there were only seven state-mandated benefits, but today most states have them. Before 1996 only state legislatures had established health insurance mandates, and these mandates applied only to traditional health insurance benefits within the state. But that year Congress passed the first-ever federal benefit mandates, requiring health plans and employers to cover a minimum maternity stay of 48 hours and to cover mental health services at the same level as physical healthcare services. We will discuss federal and state regulation in more detail later in the course. 
It is important to understand that if a benefit is defined as a mandated benefit, it must be included in the benefits of all insured products offered by all managed care organizations and health insurance companies. Cost-Sharing 
We introduced deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments in the last module. Let’s take another look. 

Copayments 
A copayment is a specific dollar amount that a member must pay to the provider out of her own pocket for a specified service at the time that the service is rendered. The amount is the same regardless of the actual cost of care provided. For instance, if a plan has a $10 copayment for a physician office visit, the member pays this amount whether the doctor provides only a few services or many during the visit.  
Copayment amounts generally vary by type of service. For example, preventive services may be fully covered by the plan with no copayment, while other services typically require copayments.  
Coninsurance 
The terms “copayment” and “coinsurance” are sometimes confused, but they have distinct meanings. While a copayment is normally a flat dollar amount (such as $50 per specialist visit), coinsurance is typically a percentage of the total cost of the service or product provided (such as 10 percent of the cost of a $700 test). Thus coinsurance is based on the total cost of the service while a copayment is not. 
Deductibles 
A deductible is a fixed dollar amount that an insured or member must pay for her healthcare, within some defined period, before the insurer or plan starts to pay benefits. For instance, an insured might have to pay the first $500 of her healthcare expenses each year before the plan begins paying benefits. There may be separate deductibles for specific services, and deductibles may vary depending on whether services are provided by a network or a non-network provider. 
While health plans may have deductibles, copayments, and/or coinsurance, cost-sharing requirements in health plans generally result in less out-of-pocket expense for the member than in most traditional indemnity plans.  
Access to Care 
Now that we have described the types of benefits found frequently in health plans, let’s learn how plan members access these benefits. Previously we defined “access” as an individual’s ability to obtain healthcare. The lack of access to care by many people was one of the main reasons for the recent healthcare reform in the United States. 
Health plans use networks to address some traditional and some new access issues. In health plans, healthcare is provided to members through networks of physicians, hospitals, and other providers. In this section we will introduce networks, discuss the use of primary care as an entry point to manage healthcare, look at the role of the physician in primary care, discuss issues of provider choice, and review how networks enhance access to care.  
Networks 
The physicians, hospitals, and other providers that a health plan has contracted with to deliver medical services to its members are often referred to as the plan’s delivery system or provider network. For most plans the network is an important part of plan design. Some plans or products require members to receive care only from providers in the network. With other plans or products, members may receive services from nonnetwork providers, but when they do their out-of-pocket expenses are higher. 
A health plan’s network is formed by the plan entering into contractual arrangements with specified providers. These contracted providers agree to furnish services to specified persons (members or enrollees) in exchange for specified payments. The contract between the plan and the provider also includes rules and obligations, including medical management, billing, etc. There are many variations to the contract, as different arrangements are needed for different types of health plans, products, and networks. 
One of the most important goals of a health plan is ensuring that members have convenient access to services. To provide good access, health plans must ensure that their network includes: 
 the right number of providers,  the right types of providers, and  providers in the right locations. 
The number of providers needed is sometimes based on ratios of physicians to members. The types of providers in a network are dependent on the type of plan or benefits offered. Finally, providers must be within reasonable proximity to members’ homes and/or workplaces. For added convenience and access, plans sometimes seek to combine a comprehensive set of services (such as medical, laboratory, and pharmacy) in one location. 
A health plan must validate that providers in its network meet standards for their particular profession. To accomplish this, health plans use various criteria, standards, and processes. These processes and other activities related to provider selection will be discussed in detail in the modules “Health Plan Structure and Management” and “Network Structure and Management.” 
Primary Care 
In health plans the role of primary care is very important. In its most general sense, primary care refers to general medical care and care that is provided directly to a patient without a referral from another physician. Primary care generally focuses on the prevention and treatment of routine injuries and illnesses.  
Primary care providers (PCPs) are typically family or general practitioners, internists, obstetricians/gynecologists, and pediatricians. Some plans allow for medical professionals such as nurses, nurse practitioners, or physician’s assistants. Primary care providers are also referred to as personal care physicians or personal care providers. 
In addition to providing primary care services, in many health plans the PCP serves as the member’s point of entry into the healthcare system, her first point of contact. The PCP also coordinates the healthcare services of her members, including determining when specialty care is needed and referring the member to a specialist provider. Other PCP roles may include managing and directing the member’s healthcare. PCP roles and responsibilities may be defined in the contract between the PCP and the health plan. The role of the PCP may vary depending on the health plan and product type. 
Example: Grace is a member of a PPO. She has chosen Dr. Cherie Mansetti, an internist, as her primary care physician. Grace sees Dr. Mansetti for digestion difficulties, which the doctor diagnoses as a medical condition involving her gallbladder. Dr. Mansetti refers Grace to one of the plan’s specialists, Dr. McCarty, for surgery. Dr. McCarty operates on her at a hospital in the plan’s network.  
Provider Choice 
A choice of providers is very important when individuals select a health plan and in member satisfaction with their plan. For this reason plans strive to make their networks attractive and comprehensive. In addition, many health plans offer products that allow for more open access and fewer restrictions. PPOs and POS products are examples of products with more open access to providers.  
Traditionally health plans have managed member access to healthcare services by either requiring members to use network providers or by providing financial incentives for them to do so. The following are examples of how this is accomplished in some plans: 
• Members are encouraged to use network doctors and providers by a benefit design that includes lower out-of-pocket costs for network care than for out-ofnetwork care. 
• Provider contracts are structured to include favorable financing and delivery provisions. 
Enhancing Accessibility of Care 
By their very design health plans enhance the accessibility of healthcare in ways that are not achievable under indemnity coverage. For instance, a plan’s cost structure may lower members out-of-pocket cost, and there is typically an emphasis on prevention and wellness. 
Cost Structure 
Traditional indemnity plans typically have high out-of-pocket costs, including significant deductibles and coinsurance, and this may create barriers to access to care. Health plans’ out-of-pocket costs are typically lower, so that care is more accessible.  
Primary Care, Prevention, and Wellness 
Health plans emphasize primary care, prevention, and wellness. Members are encouraged by benefit design to seek preventive healthcare such as mammograms, physical examinations, and screenings (for instance, for high cholesterol). Health plan primary care focuses on early detection and treatment, preventing illnesses or complications. Health plan benefit designs generally include incentives (such as lower copayments) for members to use PCP services. Some health plans give premium discounts or include benefit coverage for wellness programs, initiatives, and/or wellness results.  
Utilization and Quality Management 
Two additional concepts critical to healthcare management are utilization management and quality management. Both will be covered in detail in later modules, but you need some basic information about them before you begin your study of health plan types. 
Utilization Management 
Utilization management (UM) is managing the use of healthcare services so that patients receive necessary, appropriate, and high-quality care in a cost-effective way. UM includes a number of techniques: 
• Demand management—strategies designed to reduce the overall demand for and use of unnecessary healthcare services by providing plan members with the information they need to make informed healthcare decisions. 
• Utilization review—an evaluation of the medical necessity, appropriateness, and efficiency of healthcare services and treatments for a given patient. 
• Case management—an approach that identifies plan members with special healthcare needs, develops a strategy to meet those needs, and coordinates and monitors the delivery of necessary services. 
• Disease management—the coordination of diagnostic, preventive, and therapeutic measures to manage certain chronic conditions (such as diabetes and hypertension). 
These techniques can be applied to all components of a plan's healthcare delivery system, including primary care, specialist referrals, hospitalizations, drug use, and others. They may be conducted by the plan itself or by a third-party organization specializing in UM. 
Quality Management 
Quality management (QM) is an organization-wide, ongoing process of measuring and improving the quality of the healthcare and services a health plan provides to its members. Most health plan QM programs have the following features: 
• Oversight. Most health plans assign overall responsibility for QM to a senior executive, who typically heads a QM oversight committee. 
• Credentialing. Health plans evaluate the credentials of providers before permitting them to join their networks. 
• Measuring and improving care. Plans measure the quality of the care provided by their providers and seek to improve it in various ways, including outcomes studies, provider profiling, clinical practice guidelines, benchmarking, peer review, and member surveys. 

• Members’ rights and complaint resolution procedures. Most health plans have a written policy stipulating members’ rights and responsibilities and a formal system for addressing complaints. 
 
 
Page 
4 	Provider Compensation 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 discuss the problems presented by fee-for-service (FFS) compensation of healthcare providers and how capitation addresses those problems;  explain how capitation works;  describe other provider compensation arrangements used by health plans;  describe withholds, risk pools, and pay for performance (P4P) programs; and  compare compensation arrangements in terms of the risk assumed by providers.  
As we learned in earlier modules, in traditional indemnity health insurance healthcare providers are generally compensated by fee-for-service (FFS). That is, when a provider performs a service for an insured, the provider bills the insurer her normal fee for that service, and the insurer pays. Health plans continue to use the fee-for-service approach in some cases, but they have also developed a number of other compensation methods, which we will discuss in this module. 
Incentives and Risk 
As we have mentioned briefly before, the fee-for-service approach creates a problem. The more healthcare services a provider delivers, and the more expensive the services, the more the provider is paid. Consequently, providers have a strong financial incentive to deliver more care, and they have few incentives to avoid unnecessary services. Combined with the need many physicians feel to perform unnecessary tests and treatments to make sure they cannot be accused of not doing everything conceivably possible (defensive medicine), this creates strong pressure for the overutilization of healthcare and drives up costs. Also, FFS gives physicians no financial incentives to focus on preventive care or promote wellness, since it is only when people get sick that they are paid. 
In response to this problem, other provider compensation methods have been developed and are used by health plans. These methods give providers incentives to deliver care in a cost-effective way, avoid unnecessary services, and promote prevention and wellness. One of the main ways they do this is risk-sharing. In the context of health plans, financial risk is the possibility that plan members will need more healthcare than projected, resulting in a financial loss. A health plan collects premiums from members and purchasers such as employers. Premium amounts are set to cover the level of healthcare services that the plan’s members are expected to need. If members need more services than projected, the premiums collected may not be sufficient to cover costs, and the plan suffers a financial loss. Under fee-for-service compensation, healthcare providers do not share this risk—if insureds need more services, the providers deliver them and bill the insurer for them, and the insurer pays the additional cost. But under other forms of compensation, providers do share risk, and this gives them an incentive to hold down costs, as we will see in this module. 
Why do providers accept these other forms of compensation and the risk they entail? Because of the volume of patients health plans can offer. To become a participating provider with a health plan, a provider may have to accept a compensation arrangement that pays somewhat less for services that she normally charges and that requires her to assume a certain amount of risk. But doing so gives her access a large population of patients, so that participation is financially advantageous for her. 
Capitation 
How Capitation Works 
Capitation is a provider compensation method that is very different from fee-for-service. Under FFS a provider is paid based on the number of services she provides and the cost of those services. Under capitation the provider is paid based on the number of people she cares for (she is paid “per capita,” meaning “per person”), regardless of how many services she provides to them or what those services cost. More specifically, a health plan pays a provider a set amount (a capitation rate) for each plan member under her care for each time period. In exchange, the provider must deliver whatever healthcare services are needed by those members during that period. Whether the provider delivers many services or few or none, she receives the same amount. 
Most commonly, a capitated provider is paid on a per member per month (PMPM) basis. For example, a plan may pay a primary care provider a certain dollar amount per month for each plan member assigned to her. In return for that PMPM payment, the PCP must provide whatever primary care those members need.  
Risk and Incentives 
Under FFS, as we have seen, a provider assumes no risk. If insureds need more services that expected, she delivers them and is paid for them. Under capitation, on the other hand, providers do bear risk. If members need few or no services, a provider will have to do little for her capitation payment, but if they need a lot of care, she will have to deliver many services and will not be paid any more.  
This risk-sharing gives capitated providers a strong incentive to avoid unnecessary services and control costs. And it promotes healthcare quality as well, because physicians also have a strong incentive to promote prevention and wellness—it is in the doctors’ interest for the members assigned to them to stay healthy so that they do not need services and for sick patients to get well soon and avoid complications and more expensive treatments. 
Capitation Considerations 
In addition to PCPs, other physicians including specialists may be compensated by capitation. So may groups of physicians (including multi-specialty groups) as well as hospitals. When an organization such as a group practice is paid by capitation to provide care for a plan’s members, capitation may cover primary care only, or primary and specialty care but not ancillary services, or all services. 
In designing capitation arrangements for PCPs, a plan must decide what services will be considered primary care and therefore covered by the capitation payment and stipulate these services in the provider contract. Likewise, if a hospital is paid by capitation, the contract must clearly set forth what services are included. 
A hospital that accepts capitation for providing the care needed by a health plan’s members assumes a considerable amount of risk—if members need more hospital care than expected, the hospital will be responsible for providing it without additional compensation from the plan. Consequently, such a hospital must have a strong program to manage utilization, and it may purchase stop-loss insurance, which covers costs if expenditures go above a certain level.  
As we have seen, some health plans (such as PPOs and POS plans) allow members to receive care from non-network providers. This can create a situation in which a plan is paying a provider a capitation payment to provide the care needed by a member, but in fact the member is receiving services from a non-network provider instead. Various adjustments may be made to account for out-of-network care. 
Trends in Capitation 
In the early decades of managed care, when most health plans were HMOs, capitation was a very common form of compensation. But as we saw in Module 1, in the 1990s PPOs and other plan types became more popular, and they tend not to use capitation. 
As a result, currently only a small minority of physician compensation is capitated. However, as healthcare costs continue to rise and policymakers and health plans seek ways to control them, capitation is getting another look, and many proposals for reform of provider compensation include elements of capitation, often blended with other approaches. So capitation may play a greater role in the future.1 
Other Compensation Arrangements  
In addition to traditional fee-for-service and capitation, there are a number of other compensation arrangements between health plans and providers. 
Fee Schedule 
A health plan may pay providers on a fee-for-service basis but limit the amounts paid by means of a fee schedule. This is a list of healthcare services and procedures with the maximum amount that the plan will pay for each service. This approach is also referred to as fee maximums, capped fees, or fee allowances.  
Providers serving a plan’s members agree to charge the plan no more than the maximum listed in the fee schedule and to accept that amount as payment in full. This means that providers may not engage in balance billing of members. For instance, if a doctor normally charges $100 for a service, but a plan’s fee schedule allows only $85, the doctor must accept the $85 as payment in full and may not charge the member the remaining $15. Thus, although this is a form or fee-for-service, the provider accepts some degree of risk—while the allowable fee will normally cover the cost of providing a service, if it does not, the provider must bear the cost. 
A fee schedule is typically based on usual, customary, and reasonable (UCR) fees. A UCR fee for a service is the amount commonly charged for the service by physicians in the region, and health plans may determine UCR fees by collecting data on physician charges. 
Discounted Fee-for-Service  
Another common compensation arrangement is discounted fee-for-service. The plan pays the provider the UCR fee for a service minus a negotiated percentage discount. As with a fee schedule, the provider agrees to accept this amount as payment in full and so accept as certain degree of risk.  
Relative Value Scale 
Some plans use a relative value scale (RVS). The plan gives a numerical value to each medical procedure or service. This value is multiplied by a dollar amount negotiated by the plan and providers, yielding a payment amount. For example, a plan rates the value of a particular service as 5 and another service as 7. It multiplies these values by $11 dollars (the dollar multiplier agreed to by the plan and providers) and pays $55 for the first service and $77 for the second. 
Simple RVS systems tend to give a high value to medical procedures (such as surgery) and a relatively low value to other activities such as seeing patients in office visits or researching patients’ condition. To address this problem, the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS) was developed. RBRVS seeks to take into account all the resources that physicians use in providing care to patients, including not only physical and procedural resources, but educational, mental, and financial resources as well. 
Salary  
In some HMOs some physicians are employees and are paid a salary. A salaried doctor generally assumes no risk—she is paid the same whether members need more or less care. However, some HMOs use withholds or other arrangements (see below) to share risk with employee-physicians, and many offer incentive payments to doctors who meet cost-effectiveness or quality goals. 
Diagnosis-Related Groups (DRGs) 
The federal Medicare program developed the Diagnosis-Related Group (DRG) system for compensating hospitals, and some health plans use it as well. When a member is hospitalized, her case is classified as one of about 500 DRGs based on her diagnosis, her age and gender, the procedures to be performed, and any complications or other medical conditions. Cases in the same DRG generally require about the same amount of hospital resources, and a fixed payment amount is set for each DRG based on average costs. The hospital is paid the DRG rate for the hospitalization, regardless of how long the stay actually lasts or how much it costs the hospital. This means that the hospital assumes risk—it must bear the cost if expenditures exceed the DRG rate. 
Per Diems  
A health plan may pay a hospital a fixed per diem amount for each day a plan member is in the hospital, regardless of the services used. The amount may be higher for some types of care (such as intensive care or cardiac care), and sometimes a higher amount is paid for the first day, as this is often the most costly for the hospital.  
The per diem amount is negotiated by the plan and the hospital. The more patients a plan provides to a hospital, the lower the per diem rate the hospital is likely to agree to. As with a DRG rate, the hospital assumes risk and bears the cost if expenses are greater than the per diem amount. 
Episode-Based Payments 
A compensation method that is being developed and drawing increased interest is episode-based payments. The health plan pays a single amount for all the services associated with a single episode of care, such as a hospitalization. For example, one payment might cover a surgical procedure, the associated hospital stay, and all related care for 90 days after discharge from the hospital. This payment would be shared by the hospital, the surgeon, and other providers involved in the case. 
Episode-based payments encourage doctors, hospitals, and others to work together to coordinate their services and avoid overlap and waste. They also promote longer-term accountability—if providers must pay for any care needed for 90 days after the patient leaves the hospital, there will be strong incentives to avoid complications that might require additional care or even readmission. The main challenges to this approach are getting hospital, physicians, and other providers to work together and to equitably distribute the payment among them.2 
Multiple Compensation Methods 
Note that health plans typically use different compensation arrangements for different types of providers. For example, a plan might use capitation for PCPs, discounted feefor-service for specialty physicians, and per diem payments for hospitals.  
Other Compensation Provisions 
Some other provisions can be used in conjunction with the compensation arrangements described above, to further share risk and give providers incentives to provide costeffective, high-quality care.  
Withholds 
A withhold may be used with some compensation arrangements. For example, a health plan pays PCPs by capitation, but each month it does not pay a certain percentage of the capitation payment. At the end of the year, if the number of referrals by PCPs to specialists has been as projected, the withheld money is paid to the PCPs. But if there have been many referrals, the plan uses all or part of the withheld funds to cover the cost, and the PCPs do not receive it. A withhold may also be used for salaried physicians. 
What is the purpose of such a withhold? Since capitated providers receive the same payment regardless of the amount of services they deliver, some may be tempted to reduce their workload by referring patients they could treat themselves to a specialist. A withhold gives them an incentive to avoid this. It also gives them an incentive to focus on preventive care and wellness so that their patients do not develop the need for specialty care. 
Risk Pools 
Risk pools are another way of giving providers an incentive to deliver care themselves and to promote prevention and wellness so that the need for non-primary care does not develop. For example, a plan pays monthly capitation payments to PCPs, and it also pays monthly capitation payments into three pools, one for specialty care, one for hospital care, and one for ancillary services. The money in the pools is used to cover the costs of these services, but if members do not use many services and there is money left over, some of it is distributed to the PCPs. On the other hand, if members need many services and the money in the pools is insufficient, physicians may have to make up part of the shortfall. 
Pay for Performance (P4P) Programs 
Many health plans have pay for performance (P4P) programs. Targets are set for measures of physician performance, which may be in the areas of quality of care, patient satisfaction, utilization, or cost-effectiveness. If a doctor meets these targets, he is rewarded, typically by means of a percentage increase in compensation or a bonus. Some plans share with physicians meeting the targets the savings realized through costeffectiveness efforts. Most P4P programs give physicians report cards showing how they are doing in relation to the targets and what they can do to meet them. Targets may be based on nationally developed and recognized measurements or may be developed by the plan itself. 
P4P has been widely adopted in the healthcare industry and is being touted as an important way of promoting high-quality and cost-effective care. So far these programs have had some positive impact but have not resulted in major improvements. P4P programs are evolving, and many details are still being worked out, such as identifying and obtaining the most relevant data and setting incentives payments at the right level to influence physician behavior.3 
The Risk-Sharing Continuum 
The provider compensation arrangements discussed in this module can be seen as falling on a continuum based on the degree of financial risk borne by providers—that is, the extent to which, if the care needs of plan members are greater than expected providers must bear the cost. 
At one end of the spectrum is traditional fee-for-service, under which providers bear no risk. If plan members need more services, providers deliver them and charge the plan for them. The plan must cover all costs with the premiums it receives, and if costs exceed premiums, the plan suffers a loss.  
At the other end of the spectrum is capitation, under which providers bear most of the risk. They receive the same payment whether the members they are responsible for require no care, a few services, or many services. If members need much more care than expected, providers must deliver it without any extra compensation. Meanwhile, the plan bears relatively little risk, as its costs are fixed—the set PMPM fees it pays providers.  
Between these two extremes are the other arrangements we have looked at. Under fee schedules, discounted fee-for-service, and RBRVS, a physician receives a set amount for a service; this amount is calculated to cover his costs, but if it does not, he must cover any extra himself—he may not bill the plan or the member for any more. Thus he incurs a certain amount of risk. Per diems and DRG rates for hospitals are similar—they are flat rates intended to cover costs, but if they do not, the hospital must bear any additional cost and so assumes some risk.  
Salary compensation is near the no-risk end of the continuum. Employee-physicians receive the same salary whether members need few or many services, and they do not bear any losses if costs are high. But as noted, withholds and other arrangements may be used to share some risk with salaried doctors.  
Notes 
                                                 
1
 Samuel H. Zuvekas and Joel W. Cohen. “Paying Physicians by Capitation: Is the Past Now 
Prologue?” Health Affairs 29, no. 9 (2010), 1661-1666. Available at http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/29/9/1661.full.html  
2
 Robert E. Mechanic and Stuart H. Altman. “Payment Reform Options: Episode Payment Is a 
Good Place to Start.” Health Affairs 28, no. 2 (2009), w262-w271. Available at http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/28/2/w262.full.html  
3
 Cheryl L. Damberg, Kristiana Raube, Stephanie S. Teleki, and Erin de la Cruz. “Taking Stock of 
Pay for Performance: A Candid Assessment from the Front Lines.” Health Affairs 28, no. 2, 
(2009), 517-525. Available at http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/28/2/517.full.html  

5 	The Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  summarize the key elements of HMO membership and benefits,  describe HMO network arrangements,  explain how HMOs are paid and pay their providers, and  discuss utilization management and quality management in HMOs.  
A health maintenance organization (HMO) is a health plan that assumes or shares both the financial risks and the delivery risks associated with providing comprehensive medical services to a voluntarily enrolled population in a particular geographic area, usually in return for a fixed, prepaid fee. In other words, an HMO arranges for the delivery of medical care and provides, or shares in providing, the financing of that medical care. An HMO may be owned or sponsored by many different types of organizations and may be for-profit or not-for-profit. 
Historically, HMOs were called prepaid group practices, although they were formed as corporations. The laws of most states require an HMO to be organized as a corporation rather than a partnership or other legal entity. Most HMOs must be licensed in the states in which they are incorporated, and they must comply with statutory requirements for HMOs in each state in which they do business.  
Background 
Although predecessors to HMOs have been in existence for over 70 years, HMOs became popular during the 1970s as a result of federal legislation. The HMO Act of 1973 removed many of the market barriers that constrained the development of HMOs. The Act and its amendments also established requirements that an HMO could voluntarily meet to become federally qualified. Federal qualification preempted the application of certain state laws to HMOs. To be federally qualified, an HMO could not exclude preexisting conditions and had to offer the following: 
 healthcare delivery in a geographic service area,  both basic and supplemental healthcare services, and   voluntary membership to an enrolled population.  
The Act also required dual choice in employer-sponsored health plans, which we discussed previously. Many HMOs pursued federal qualification because it gave them access to employers in their markets. Federal financial assistance, in the form of grants and loans, was made available from 1973 until 1981. 
In 1995 federal law eliminated the dual choice requirement, and because of this change and the discontinuation of federal grants, HMOs now have fewer incentives to become federally qualified. However, federal qualification is still important for Medicare and large employer contracts. 
HMOs are heavily regulated at both the federal and state levels to ensure solvency and member access to quality medical care. An HMO may have to have a license as an HMO or insurance company (called a certificate of authority or COA) in each state in which it conducts business. Most HMOs are subject to state enabling statutes and the requirements of various state health departments or state departments of insurance. 
Characteristics of HMOs 
The following are key characteristics of HMO operation, organization, and provision of healthcare and insurance coverage: 
 tight relationships with providers,  an emphasis on the role of primary care providers (PCPs),   the utilization of a referral management process,  an emphasis on prevention and wellness, and  often, an integration of insurance and the provision of healthcare services. 
These characteristics enable an HMO to provide access to quality, affordable care through a coordinated system. One measure of an HMO’s quality is its accreditation by independent accrediting agencies such as NCQA (the National Committee for Quality Assurance). Employers and other purchasers and payors of healthcare benefits normally consult these agencies as part of their health plan selection process. 
What do employers consider in evaluating and selecting HMOs? Access to care, cost, and member satisfaction are almost always important. Most employers also take into account the financial strength of an HMO, the reputation of its networks, and the ease of doing business with it. Many also consider such things as care outcomes, the focus on prevention and wellness, NCQA accreditation, historic cost trends, the ability to approve health status, physician turnover, physician credentialing, and Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS) reports. 
Membership and Enrollment 
Most commonly a person becomes a member of an HMO by enrolling in an employersponsored group plan. Under such a plan, a member has no contractual relationship with the HMO; the contract is between the HMO and the employer. But individuals may also join an HMO on their own, and this is a growing market for HMOs. These persons contract directly with the HMO and receive benefits on an individual basis. Members of an HMO include both subscribers (who are eligible to enroll directly) and their dependents (whose eligibility is contingent on that of the subscriber). 
Traditionally HMOs were marketed to employer groups with more than 100 employees. But today HMOs serve large groups, small groups, and individuals. Members range from the very young to the very old, and from the very healthy to the chronically ill. Many Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries join HMOs. 
Employers sponsoring HMOs usually have an annual open enrollment period, usually 30 days, during which employees select their healthcare coverage. During this period the HMO automatically accepts those employees who wish to enroll or to switch to the HMO from another plan offered by the employer. Employers and HMOs also allow new employees to enroll during an initial enrollment period. 
Federally qualified HMOs and some state-licensed HMOs must cover preexisting conditions for all eligible employees and dependents who enroll during their initial enrollment period. However, under the Affordable Care Act (ACA, commonly called healthcare reform), all health plans (not just some HMOs) will have to cover preexisting conditions (effective 2014).  
Benefits 
HMOs provide comprehensive medical benefits. By law federally qualified HMOs must provide a stipulated minimum set of benefits, and some states require HMOs to offer certain benefits to meet licensing requirements. In addition to medical coverage, most HMOs cover special services and products such as vision care, dental care, mental healthcare, and prescription drugs. HMOs typically require lower member cost-sharing than other plan types. 
HMOs historically have focused on preventive care and wellness. While they also rely on disease management and other approaches to controlling costs, they recognize that prevention is the best method of healthcare cost containment. 
The preventive care programs of HMOs are typically extensive. Routine physical examinations, 24-hour telephone access to a nurse, prenatal care, well-baby care, and childhood immunizations are common preventive care services offered. And because HMOs strongly emphasize prevention, these services are often covered in full, although a small copayment for an office visit may be charged. (However, under ACA, as of 2014 most health plans will no longer be allowed to charge cost-sharing for preventive services.) HMOs may also provide members with medical information through seminars, newsletters, and self-help medical booklets. 
HMOs often give their members access to wellness programs, such as for smoking cessation, weight management, and stress management. Some HMOs contract with local health clubs to make exercise facilities and equipment available and affordable to members. 
By offering a comprehensive set of benefits, an HMO promotes comprehensive care. And by coordinating care across various areas, an HMO ensures that its members receive quality, cost-effective, and appropriate medical care on a timely basis. An HMO also provides convenient, usually local, access to preventive care without significant financial cost. 
Networks 
HMOs deliver comprehensive medical care to their members by entering into negotiated contracts with providers to form a network. Alternatively, an HMO may own the facilities and employ the physicians in its network. The network providers, including physicians, hospitals, and ancillary service providers, deliver medical care to HMO members in exchange for negotiated compensation. 
Unlike the financing of healthcare, which may be conducted on a national or regional basis, the delivery of healthcare is primarily local. Providing members with convenient, local access to an HMO’s provider network is therefore critical to the relationship between the HMO and employers and other purchasers or payors. Some HMOs operate in only one geographic region, but others are national organizations that own or sponsor separate HMOs in different regions.  
In building and maintaining a provider network, an HMO considers the following: 
• Access—How many and what types of providers are needed? In what locations within the service area? 
• Credentialing—What credentials should be required and verified? How often should recredentialing and peer reviews be conducted? 
• Contractual relationships—Should the HMO own facilities or contract for their use? Should it employ providers or contract for their services? How should providers be compensated (for example, salary, capitation, discounted fee-forservice)? 
By contracting with specific providers to deliver care, an HMO seeks to increase quality control over medical care and decrease costs. Let us now examine the relationships between an HMO and the three key provider groups: physicians, hospitals, and ancillary service providers. 
Physicians 
The relationship between an HMO and its participating physicians is a contractual one, either direct employment or an independent contractor arrangement. As noted earlier, to establish a network that provides members with adequate access to medical care, an HMO must contract with sufficient numbers and types of physicians. 
An HMO determines the number of primary care and specialty care physicians needed in its network in part by considering the size and location of the geographic service area, criteria for network adequacy, the medical needs of its members, and employer or other purchaser requirements, including provider education, board certification, and work history. 
Before an HMO contracts with a physician, the HMO first verifies his or her credentials. After becoming part of the network, the physician is subject to recredentialing and ongoing peer review. Credentialing, recredentialing, and peer review enable an HMO to establish and maintain quality standards of clinical competence, professional conduct, and practice management. 
The Role of Primary Care Providers 
Most HMOs require their members to select a primary care provider (PCP) from the HMO’s network. Recall that a PCP is usually an internal medicine or family medicine practitioner for adults and a pediatrician for children. Some HMOs also utilize nurse practitioners or physician assistants in the primary care function. 
In addition to providing primary care services, in HMOs the PCP serves as the member’s point of entry into the healthcare system. Usually to see a specialist an HMO member must obtain a referral from her PCP. But some HMOs allow members with specified conditions to contact certain specialists such as obstetricians directly instead of going through the PCP first.  

Out-of-Network Services 
Traditionally, an HMO did not cover medical care obtained outside its provider network. However, in response to member requests for greater provider choice and timely access to quality medical care, many HMOs now offer options, such as a point-of-service (POS) product, in which members may choose out-of-network providers, usually at a higher cost to the member. Some of these HMOs require members to obtain a referral and/or prior authorization to obtain coverage for out-of-network services. 
Hospitals  
HMOs negotiate contracts with hospitals and other inpatient facilities to provide medical services to their members. Again, the issues of access, credentialing, and contractual arrangement cited above come into play.  
Accreditation by The Joint Commission (TJC, formerly the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations or JCAHO) and verification of the existence of a state license are typically minimum requirements for a hospital to participate in an HMO network. Other factors that an HMO considers in contracting with hospitals include the level and cost of hospital services, the quality of the physicians on the hospital’s medical staff, the type of specialty facilities and services offered by the hospital, and member access within a geographic area. 
Ancillary Service Providers 
An HMO also contracts with ancillary service providers. Ancillary services are auxiliary or supplemental services that support the diagnosis and treatment of a patient’s condition. They include laboratory, radiology, and other diagnostic services; home health care; and physical and occupational therapy. An HMO contracts with the appropriate number and types of ancillary service providers so that its provider network includes the healthcare services that are commonly needed by plan members. 
An HMO may provide some ancillary services, such as laboratory services, in the facility where its PCPs see plan members. Other ancillary services are provided at separate facilities. Ancillary service providers must provide adequate access to their services and participate in an HMO’s quality management program. 
In a typical HMO, a PCP refers a member to ancillary providers for all services covered by the plan. And for certain ancillary services, such as physical or occupational therapy, an HMO may require a member to obtain prior approval from her PCP to continue the therapy beyond a specified number of treatments. 
Some HMOs use a specialty care provider for mental health and chemical dependency services. These specialists may be psychologists and social workers who complete initial assessments and conduct referrals to specified facilities. 
Financing 
Now let’s look at how an HMO finances healthcare. We will examine first how an HMO is paid for providing healthcare by its members, sponsoring employers, and other payors (prepaid care), and then how the HMO pays its providers for delivering that care (provider compensation).  
Prepaid Care 
An HMO usually has a prepaid care arrangement. Typically a monthly premium of a fixed amount is paid in advance of delivery of care. This premium may be paid by members, sponsoring employers, other payors such as the government, or a combination. The premium generally covers most healthcare services that a member might need, no matter how many services the member uses or how often. 
Although HMOs typically do not have deductibles or coinsurance, they usually have small copayments for some services. For instance, an HMO may require its members to pay a $10 or $15 copayment for each doctor’s office visit or prescription or $50 for an emergency room visit. 
Provider Compensation 
An HMO negotiates compensation arrangements with its providers, and there are a variety of reimbursement methods. Compensation arrangements are one of the features that distinguish the various HMO models from one another. Let’s look at the compensation arrangements typically used with physicians, hospitals, and ancillary service providers.  
Physicians 
Typical compensation arrangements for physicians include capitation, several forms of fee-for-service (FFS), and salary. Capitation is widely used for primary care providers. To gain the active involvement of PCPs in risk-sharing and utilization management, many HMOs use withholds or risk pools for nonprimary care. An HMO may have a risk pool for each broad category of care (such as specialty care, inpatient care, and others), with the risk-sharing and reward-sharing arrangements usually differing among these pools. 
In some HMOs physicians are employees and are paid a salary. Salaried physicians expect to earn an income, including benefits, equivalent to that available in the local market. Benefits that may be considered in physician contract negotiations include: salary, short-term sick leave, vacation leave, profit-sharing plans, retirement plans, professional dues and membership fees, reimbursed business-related expenses, disability income insurance, malpractice insurance, and life and health insurance. Nonfinancial benefits available to salaried physicians include access to patients and may include time off for research or volunteer work, compensatory time, and limitations on on-call time or total weekly or monthly work hours. 
Hospitals 
HMOs reimburse hospitals in several ways, including FFS, discounted FFS, DiagnosisRelated Groups (DRGs), per diem rates, and capitation. Often included in the compensation agreement between an HMO and a hospital are financial incentives such as service bonuses, quality bonuses, and risk pools. Sometimes HMOs use financial disincentives when providers exceed utilization goals.  
Hospitals that are reimbursed under capitation or DRGs (as well as physicians who are capitated) may negotiate a stop-loss provision in their HMO contracts. This specifies that, once a provider’s total costs have reached a certain level, additional costs will be reimbursed under a different payment method, such as discounted FFS. 
Factors that determine an HMO’s compensation arrangements with hospitals include state laws and regulations, market competition, hospital ownership of the HMO, and the level of predictability, supported by valid data, associated with hospital utilization. 
Ancillary Service Providers  
Compensation arrangements for ancillary service providers include capitation and discounted FFS. For discrete services such as diagnostic testing, capitation may be best; for more open-ended services, such as home health care and hospice care, a combination of capitation and discounted FFS fees may be more appropriate. 
Capitation enables an HMO to share risk with providers and to manage costs. In exchange for accepting capitation, ancillary service providers receive a large referral base and a stable income flow. 
Utilization and Quality Management 
Utilization Management 
An HMO manages physician utilization through capitation, risk pools, and physician practice guidelines. These techniques shift part of the utilization management function to providers.  
To manage member utilization of healthcare services, HMOs use referral management (monitoring specialist referrals), copayments, and alternatives to emergency care, such as nurse advice lines and subacute clinics.  
For utilization management in a hospital setting, HMOs employ precertification for inpatient hospitalization, concurrent and retrospective reviews of admissions, inpatient utilization review, discharge planning and readmission prevention (including posthospitalization follow-up), and case management.  
A key to ensuring efficient and appropriate utilization and quality care is informationsharing among PCPs and other providers within an HMO.  
Federal regulations may require HMOs to adhere to certain utilization standards. For example, an HMO that enrolls Medicare or Medicaid beneficiaries must comply with the utilization management requirements set forth by the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Accreditation organizations and state enabling statutes may also require an HMO to provide evidence of its utilization management program. 
Under ACA, as of 2012 there will be another potential role for HMO-like organizations in the Medicare program. Accountable care organizations (ACOs) that voluntarily meet quality thresholds will share in the cost savings they achieve for Medicare. ACOs are similar to HMOs because they focus on narrow provider networks to incentivize quality outcomes. To qualify as an ACO, organizations must meet accountability standards related to overall care of Medicare beneficiaries, define evidence-based medicine, have adequate PCP participation, and report on their quality and cost outcomes. 
Quality Management 
HMOs use many quality management techniques. These include credentialing, recredentialing, and peer review for PCPs and specialists; accreditation standards for hospitals and ancillary services providers; and accreditation standards for the HMO itself.  
Because HMOs were among the first health plans, they are subject to strict regulation in regard to quality standards at both the state and federal levels. State enabling statutes require HMOs to submit evidence of a quality assurance program as part of the state licensing process. HMOs that enroll Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries must comply with CMS quality assurance requirements (and Medicaid requirements vary by state.) 
Employers also review an HMO’s accreditation status and its HEDIS measures to evaluate plan quality. Upcoming modules discuss utilization management and quality management in greater depth. 

Types of HMOs 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
 differentiate between closed and open panels and closed and open access,  describe the structure of the four main HMO models,  compare provider compensation under the four main HMO models, and  give some advantages and disadvantages of each of the four main HMO models. 
This module describes the most common ways of structuring an HMO. First we discuss the difference between closed and open provider panels and closed and open access to providers. Then we examine the four main HMO models: the independent practice association (IPA) model HMO, the staff model HMO, the group model HMO, and the network model HMO. We look at how they are structured, how they compensate providers, and their advantages and disadvantages. 
Concepts and Terms 
Before we begin our discussion of HMO models, let’s introduce some concepts and terms and review some others. 
Closed and Open Panels 
The term “panel” is used to refer collectively to the physicians who serve a health plan’s members. An HMO’s panel may be either closed or open. 
• In a closed-panel HMO, the physicians providing care to members are either employees of the HMO or members of a group of physicians that contracts with it. Other physicians are not allowed to join the HMO’s network. 
• In an open-panel HMO, any physician who meets the HMO’s standards is eligible to join the HMO’s network by contracting independently with it.  
It should be understood that while a physician who meets the criteria of an open-panel HMO is eligible to join it, the HMO has no obligation to contract with anyone. An openpanel plan may stop accepting new doctors if it already has enough to meet its members’ needs, and it may start accepting them again if a need develops. 
In a closed-panel plan, HMO physicians most commonly see only members of the HMO; in an open-panel plan, they typically see other patients as well. In the past most HMOs had closed panels, but this is no longer true. 
Closed and Open Access 
The terms “closed access” and “open access” are sometimes used along with closed and open panel, but they do not mean the same thing. 
• Closed access means that, to receive benefits, an HMO member must obtain care from network providers, not out-of-network providers. Also, to receive care from a specialist, even in-network, a member must obtain a referral from her primary care physician (PCP).  
• Open access (also called direct access or self-referral) means that a member may go to a specialist, either in-network or out-of-network, without a referral from her PCP (that is, she can self-refer). She will receive benefits, although benefits for non-network care may be lower than for network care. 
Traditionally, closed access was one of the main features that distinguished an HMO from other health plan types. But open access has become more common and closed access less so. Many consumers do not like having to go to their PCP (and paying a copayment for the office visit) in order to see, for instance, a dermatologist or allergist, and many HMOs have discontinued this requirement in an effort to meet consumer preferences and remain competitive. Also, although the PCP referral system was designed to help contain costs by managing utilization of specialty care, it is unclear if it achieves that goal. In some cases a referral requirement may even lead to a delay in treatment and higher costs. 
To sum up: “closed or open panel” refers to whether a physician can join an HMO’s panel (network); “closed or open access” refers to whether members can access nonnetwork care and whether they can access specialty care without a PCP referral. 
Provider Compensation 
In Module 4 we learned about some of the ways health plans compensate providers. Let’s review three of the most common: 
• Fee-for-service (FFS). A health plan pays a healthcare provider a fee for each service rendered to plan members, and the amount paid is the provider’s normal fee for that service. For instance, a doctor examines a plan member and has some tests done; she bills the plan her normal charges for these services, and the plan pays these amounts. Under FFS the more services a provider delivers, the more she earns. The risk is borne by the plan—if members use more services than expected, the plan pays the cost. 
• Discounted fee-for-service. A plan pays a provider a fee for each service rendered to plan members, but the amount is based on a discount off the normal charge. A set percentage may be subtracted from the provider’s regular fee or from the usual and customary fee for the service in the locality, or the amount paid may depend on a fee schedule (a listing of amounts to be paid for different services). Although the provider earns less than under regular FFS, as in regular FFS the more services she delivers, the more she earns. A provider is willing to accept discounted payment because affiliation with the plan brings her more patients, so that although she receives less per service she may have greater total earnings. As under regular FFS, the risk is borne by the plan. 
• Capitation. A healthcare provider is responsible for providing the healthcare services needed by certain members of a health plan; in return, for each time period the plan pays the provider a fixed amount per capita (per plan member served). For instance, a doctor agrees to provide primary care to members of an HMO, and the HMO pays the doctor a set dollar amount per member per month. Under capitation, the provider is paid the same amount regardless of the number or costs of the services she provides to plan members. The provider assumes risk—if members need many services and the cost of caring for them is higher than expected, the provider must bear the cost. 
The student may also want to refer to Module 4 for explanations of other compensation methods, such as the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS) and withholds. 
HMO Models 
There are models (basic types) of HMOs, distinguished largely by the contractual relationship between the HMO and its providers, including reimbursement arrangements. There are four main models:  
 the independent practice association (IPA) HMO,  the staff model HMO,   the group model HMO, and   the network model HMO. 
In addition, there is the mixed model HMO, which combines characteristics of two or more of these models. For instance, an HMO might use a staff model for primary care and a network model for specialty care. Most early HMOs were staff model or group model, but the current trend is toward the mixed model. Mixed model HMOs have evolved in response to employer and consumer demand for a flexible delivery system that combines the best features of different models. And as HMOs adopt various features from different models, distinctions among models become blurred, and it can be hard to classify a particular plan as belonging to one model or another. 
As mentioned in the last module, under healthcare reform (the Affordable Care Act) HMO-like organizations called accountable care organizations (ACOs) are expected to play a role, as are entities known as medical homes. We will discuss these in our module on provider organizations. 
IPA Model 
The most common HMO model today is the IPA model. An independent practice association (or individual practice association) is an association of physicians in independent practice. It is established primarily to give its members a vehicle for negotiating contracts with health plans. IPAs often include a variety of providers, including individual primary care physicians, individual specialist physicians, group practices, and multi-specialty group practices (for instance, including internists, family practitioners, pediatricians, orthopedists, and others). We discuss IPAs in more detail in a later module. 
In an IPA model HMO, each participating physician contracts with the IPA, and the IPA contracts with the HMO. The HMO pays the IPA, and the IPA pays its members. The IPA agrees to provide healthcare services to HMO members, and the IPA’s physicians become part of the HMO’s network, agreeing to adhere to the terms of the IPA-HMO contract. But IPA physicians remain independent practitioners who manage their own offices and medical records; they usually see other patients besides HMO members and may contract with other health plans. An HMO may contract with more than one IPA, and an IPA may contract with more than one health plan. 
An IPA model HMO may be established in different ways. 
• Sometimes physicians in an area form an IPA, which contracts with one or more HMOs or other health plans. 
• Sometimes the HMO and community physicians work together to create an IPA and recruit other physicians. In this case, the HMO and IPA typically have an exclusive contract—that is, the IPA cannot contract with other HMOs or health plans. 
• Sometimes a hospital establishes an IPA, which contracts with an HMO.  
Some IPAs have an open panel—all physicians who meet the IPA’s standards are eligible to join. But some have a closed panel—for instance, physicians may not join a hospital-based IPA unless they are affiliated with the hospital. 
Compensation 
In an IPA model HMO, compensation is normally by fee-for-service or capitation; most commonly plans use capitation for PCPs and discounted FFS or the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS) for specialists. HMO members make copayments to physicians for office visits, but they account for only a small portion of physician compensation. 
An IPA may use techniques such as withholds to share financial risk with member physicians and give them financial incentives to manage utilization. As you recall from Module 4, a withhold is a percentage of provider compensation that is retained by a health plan during a year. If care costs are higher than expected, this money is used to cover them; if they are not and funds remain, the money is distributed to providers at the end of the year. An IPA may also establish compensation systems that depend on quality and preventive care measures. 
Advantages and Disadvantages 
The open-panel IPA model appeals to HMOs and their members because members can usually choose from a large number of physicians practicing in their own offices throughout the HMO’s service area. This has given this model a competitive edge over staff model and group model HMOs. 
In addition, the IPA model is in some ways cost-effective. Since physicians have their own offices, the HMO does not have the expenses of facilities. And compensation by capitation and withholds gives physicians incentives to manage utilization and costs. But on the other hand, because there are many independent physician offices an IPA model HMO cannot realize the economies of scale of staff and group model HMOs, and it can be difficult to achieve consistency in care management and quality management. 
Many physicians appreciate that the IPA model HMO allows them to see members of other health plans and contract with multiple plans, giving them access to large numbers of patients and a variety of income sources. 
Direct Contract Model 
A less common variation of the IPA model is the direct contract model HMO (or direct model HMO). In this model the HMO contracts directly with individual physicians; there is no IPA or other legal entity that represents and negotiates contracts for groups of physicians. The HMO has full responsibility for functions that an IPA might participate in—the HMO must recruit physicians and handle care management and quality management. 
A direct contract model HMO usually includes PCPs and a wide range of specialists. It has an open panel and nonexclusive contracts (physicians may see other patients and contract with other health plans). It typically compensates PCPs through capitation and specialists through discounted FFS. Staff Model 
In a staff model HMO, the physicians who care for members are employees of the 
HMO, and usually the facilities in which they work are owned and operated by the HMO. Generally, a staff model HMO employs all the PCPs and specialists required to meet members’ needs, but some plans contract with some outside specialists, who provide services to members referred to them by the plan’s PCPs. The HMO also owns or contracts with hospitals, pharmacies, and other entities to provide non-physician healthcare services. 
A staff model HMO has a closed panel, since (with the possible exception of a few specialists, as mentioned above) a physician cannot provide services to the HMO unless she is an employee of it. Also, because physicians are employees, they may see only HMO members and may not contract with other health plans. 
In a staff model HMO, most physicians practice in centers owned and operated by the HMO, called ambulatory care facilities (ACFs). An ACF provides outpatient care— medical treatment that does not require an overnight stay. In a single facility members can access a wide range of physician services, including preventive care, acute care, and outpatient surgery, and there are also non-physician providers, nurses, laboratory and other diagnostic services and technicians, and professional support staff. In this way ACFs offer members “one-stop shopping” for healthcare. A staff model HMO may have several ACFs in its service area.  
Compensation 
Compensation in a staff model HMO is generally simple and straightforward—physicians are employees and are paid a salary. This means that all risk is borne by the HMO, not the physicians. If many or few services are provided, the physician still receives her salary, and if utilization of services is greater than expected, the HMO bears the cost. 
Advantages and Disadvantages 
The staff model offers several advantages. Care is centralized in ACFs, making possible economies of scale and facilitating the coordination of patients’ care, the management and monitoring of utilization and quality standards, and the evaluation of physician performance. And many consumers like being able to access a wide range of medical services in one place. 
On the other hand, a staff model HMO is usually more time-consuming and expensive to establish because of the capital costs of building facilities, and it is also costly to maintain because of the large fixed expense of physician salaries and building maintenance. Adding medical services or expanding geographically is also capital intensive, thus limiting a staff model HMO’s competitive ability in a changing market. For consumers, a staff model HMO offers a relatively narrow choice of providers, and to address this, many staff model HMOs have added an IPA delivery system or a point-ofservice option (discussed in the next module). 
Group Model 
In a group model HMO (also called the group practice model), the HMO contracts with a multi-specialty group practice of physicians. This group practice may be formed as a corporation, partnership, professional association, or other legal entity. The physicians in the group practice are employees of the group practice, and they may also have an ownership interest in it. They generally share office space, support staff, medical records, and medical equipment at a common medical center or clinic. While a multispecialty group practice includes PCPs and a variety of specialists, it may not have specialists in every area, in which case it may subcontract with outside specialists to provide some services to HMO members. 
A group model HMO may be either captive or independent. 
• In a captive group model HMO, the group practice serves only (or primarily) the HMO’s members and may not contract with other health plans. The panel is closed—a physician cannot join the HMO’s network without being a member of the group practice. Typically the HMO performs management and administrative functions for the group practice, and it may also own the facilities or equipment used by it. 
• In an independent group model HMO, the group practice provides services both to the HMO’s members and to other patients, and it may contract with other health plans. The HMO has an open panel—a physician can join without belonging to the group practice. 
Compensation 
A group model HMO usually compensates the group practice by capitation, and the group practice compensates its physicians (including any subcontracted specialists). 
Physician compensation is by salaries and incentive payments, based on a physician’s performance, area of expertise, and administrative work. Physician compensation often includes incentives for care management. In this arrangement, the group practice bears the risk, and to the extent physicians have an ownership in the practice they share in profits and losses.  
Advantages and Disadvantages 
Unlike a staff model HMO, a group model HMOs does not have to pay for facilities, since these are most often owned and maintained by the group practice. And it does not have the fixed expense of physician salaries, since it pays the group by capitation. On the other hand, a group model HMO may be limited by the location of the group practice, and in the case of a captive group with its closed panel, members’ access to and choice of physicians may be limited. Also, a group model HMO has less control of care management and quality of care than a staff model HMO. 
Network Model 
A network model HMO is like a group model HMO, except that the HMO contracts with more than one group practice. This allows the HMO to provide a wide range of physician services in a geographic area.  
A network model HMOs may have either an open or closed panel. For instance, suppose an HMO contracts with six or seven group practices. It might not allow physicians not belonging to these groups to join (closed panel), or it might accept into its network any physicians who meet certain criteria. Group practices can usually see nonHMO patients and contract with other health plans. 
Compensation 
As in the group model, in the network model the HMO compensates the group practice, and the group practice compensates its physicians. Network model HMOs are increasingly moving toward a mix of capitation and discounted fee-for-service in compensating group practices. To the extent a group is compensated by capitation, it bears risk.  
Advantages and Disadvantages 
An advantage of network model HMOs, particularly open-panel plans, is that members have access to a broader range of physician services and locations than under the staff and group models. As with the group model, there are no facility costs and no fixed salary expense, but there is limited control of care management and quality of care. 

7 	PPOs and Other Health Plan Types 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• define a preferred provider organization (PPO) and describe its main features, and 
• define and describe an exclusive provider organization (EPO), a point-of-service (POS) product, and a managed indemnity plan. 
In the last two modules we studied HMOs, and now we will look at some other health plan designs—preferred provider organizations (PPOs), exclusive provider organizations (EPOs), point-of-service (POS) products, and managed indemnity plans. These plan types are not as tightly managed as traditional HMOs, but they also differ from traditional indemnity insurance in that they employ healthcare management concepts and techniques. They fall in the middle of the managed care continuum discussed earlier. 
We will learn the main features that characterize each of these plan types and distinguish it from others. But it should be kept in mind that distinctions between types are not always clear-cut. In an effort to be responsive to consumer and purchaser needs and preferences and to remain competitive, health plans develop designs that in a variety of ways balance managing costs with giving members a choice of healthcare providers. As a result, a product of a certain type may take on the features characteristic of other types, blurring the difference between them. 
Preferred Provider Organizations (PPOs)  
What Is a PPO? 
A preferred provider organization (PPO) is a healthcare benefits arrangement with these main characteristics: 
• The health plan contracts with healthcare providers to deliver services to its members, and these providers agree to discounted compensation. That is, contracted providers charge the PPO less than their normal fees for services. Why are they willing to do this? Affiliation with a PPO generally brings a high volume of patients, so although a physician or hospital may receive less per service, more services are performed and billed. 
• Like an HMO, a PPO has a network, made up of its contracted providers. But unlike a traditional HMO, a PPO does not cover only care received from network providers—members can go to outside of the network and still receive benefits. However, members have strong incentives to use preferred (network) providers. The benefit package for network care is typically “richer” than for non-network care—that is, more procedures and services are covered. Also, members pay more in cost-sharing when they go out of network—copayments or coinsurance is typically higher. And there may be a limit on a member’s out-of-pocket costs for network care but no such limit for non-network care.  
• Unlike traditional HMOs, most PPOs allow members to see a specialist without a referral from their primary care physician (PCP), adding to the flexibility of the PPO model. 
• The contracted providers agree to comply with certain utilization review, care management, and quality management requirements. 
Thus PPO members have the freedom to choose any provider, as in indemnity insurance, but other features (such as incentives to stay in the network, utilization review, and quality management) promote cost-effective, high-quality care. Consumers like this combination, and a majority of employees with health coverage are in PPOs (58 percent in 2010).1 There are over 500 PPOs in the United States. (This number has been declining somewhat, but this is a result of consolidation, not decreasing enrollment.2) 
PPO Structure and Organization 
As mentioned, a PPO involves a contract arrangement between healthcare providers (physicians, hospitals, and others) and purchasers, such as insurance companies and employers. One of the primary functions of a PPO is to negotiate contracts between providers and purchasers. 
A PPO can be sponsored by a group of physicians and/or hospitals, a Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan, a third-party administrator (TPA), or an employer. But more than half are owned by insurance companies. Some of the largest insurers have developed their own PPO networks, while others lease provider networks or form cooperative ventures with independent PPOs. 
PPOs take many different forms, with a wide variety of structures. Two key ways in which they differ are risk and centralization. 
• As we explained earlier in the course, a healthcare organization assumes risk if it is exposed to possible financial losses by having to spend more to provide healthcare than it is paid for providing that care. Some PPOs are risk-bearing entities, but most are not. In many cases, the risk is assumed by self-insured employers or other organizations.  
• A PPO can be a decentralized network of preferred providers, established and maintained by the entity that insures the members, or even just leased by it. At the other end of the spectrum, a PPO can be a highly centralized organization, with not only its own network but an administrative structure that pays claims and performs other functions. Such a PPO may also assume risk. 
Like other health plans, PPOs provide comprehensive healthcare benefits. In addition to standard medical care they typically cover many types of specialty care. Nearly all cover behavioral healthcare, and a large majority include pharmacy benefits. A PPO network may include primary care providers, specialists, hospitals, diagnostic facilities, and other healthcare providers.  
Provider Compensation 
For physicians contracted with PPOs, the most common method of compensation is discounted fees—the PPO pays the physician a fee for the service she provides, but the amount is reduced from her normal charge. Fee amounts are commonly based on a fee schedule (also referred to as fee caps)—the physician receives her billed fee up to an amount set by a schedule. In 2008 over 80 percent of PPOs used a fee schedule (fee caps) and over 30 percent paid doctors based on a discount off the billed charge; less than 5 percent used capitation. (Some plans use more than one method.)3 
For hospitals PPOs use several payment methods, including per-diem payments (a set amount for each day a member is hospitalized), used by 85 percent of PPOs in 2008; discounted charges, used by 77 percent; and rates based on classes of medical conditions called diagnosis-related groups (DRGs), used by 55 percent.4 
Historically, most PPO were structured so that providers did not assume any risk for providing care, and many of the compensation methods mentioned above (such as discounted fees and charges) do not entail provider risk. But others, such as per-diem payments, DRG-based rates, and capitation, do. Some PPOs have included such risksharing arrangements in their provider contracts to promote more cost-effective care and greater provider involvement in managing utilization. 
Utilization Management, Care Management, and Quality Management 
A PPO generally requires contracted providers to follow utilization and care management procedures to achieve cost-effective, appropriate care. PPOs have adopted many utilization and care management techniques once common only to HMOs. Some PPOs, especially those owned by HMOs or insurance companies, have inhouse utilization review staffs; others contract this to outside firms or delegate it to providers.  
PPOs also employ many quality management techniques typical of HMOs. Nearly all 
PPOs routinely credential and recredential contracted physicians, and increasingly PPOs are obtaining accreditation for their quality management programs from well known independent third-party organizations such as URAC. Other Types of Health Plans  
After PPOs became popular, health plans further refined and customized products to meet the needs and preferences of consumers and purchasers, and new plan designs were introduced.  
Specialty PPOs  
Specialty PPOs are structured and operate like regular PPOs, but they provide specialty healthcare services such as dental care, behavioral healthcare, prescription drugs, vision care, physical therapy, laboratory services, chiropractics, and podiatry. (Specialty health plans are discussed in the next module.) 
Exclusive Provider Organizations (EPOs)  
An exclusive provider organization (EPO) is structured and operates like a PPO, but it is like a traditional HMO in one important way—out-of-network care is generally not covered. If a member receives services from a provider not in an EPO’s network, she receives no benefits and must pay out for the services of her own pocket. 
Many PPOs developed EPOs to help them compete directly with HMOs. In most states EPOs are regulated as insurance companies under state insurance laws and are not subject to state and federal HMO legislation. But some states either prohibit EPOs or regulate them as HMOs. 
Point-of-Service (POS) Products 
A point-of-service (POS) product is a hybrid that combines features of PPOs, HMOs, and indemnity insurance. POS products are called by several names, and there are a number of variations, so defining this design and distinguishing among types can be complicated. The basic characteristics of a POS product are these:  
• When members need healthcare, they choose at that time (at the point of service) whether to go to a network provider or one not in the network. Members going out-of-network normally pay higher cost-sharing, giving them an incentive to remain in network. In this way, POS plans are more flexible than traditional HMOs and similar to PPOs. 
• POS plans are like HMOs in that they usually require members to select a primary care physician (PCP), who delivers routine care and serves as a gatekeeper, giving referrals to specialists.  
• POS plans also resemble HMOs in their strong emphasis on preventive care and wellness (including such services as vaccinations and smoking cessation programs). 
POS products are offered by network-based health plans and by insurers. Often an 
HMO offers a POS option to its members; in this case, the HMO generally compensates PCPs by means of capitation, and it may also withhold compensation pending PCPs meeting utilization or cost-saving goals. The HMO reimburses non-network providers on a fee-for-service basis. 
As mentioned, under a POS product members receiving out-of-network care pay more, typically higher cost-sharing. In some designs, the member must pay the difference between what the POS plan pays network providers for a service and what a nonnetwork provider charges. HMO members with a POS option pay relatively small copayments for network care and 20 or 30 percent coinsurance for out-of-network care, and there is also generally a cap on non-network benefits. However, some plans provide greater benefits for non-network care if the member has obtained a referral for his PCP to see a non-network specialist. 
Some employers like POS products because they are a compromise between less restrictive designs like indemnity and PPOs and more tightly managed HMOs. In the past POS products had a major drawback—higher administrative costs, resulting from the need to administer benefits for both network and non-network providers. But this is less of a problem today because of the increased use of technology and enhanced managerial expertise. A significant percentage of employees are covered by POS products (8 percent in 2010), but the number has declined over the last decade (from an estimated 24 percent in 1999).5 
Managed Indemnity Plans 
Some indemnity health insurance plans have adopted certain managed care techniques and so are called managed indemnity plans. These plans are typically organized and administered like traditional indemnity insurance; there is no provider network, insureds use any provider they choose, and provider payment is by fee-for-service. But certain health plan cost-control measures, such as precertification and utilization review, are used.  
The Road to Consumer Choice 
PPOs, POS products, and similar designs addressed the demand for greater flexibility in health plan products, but they still insulated consumers from the cost of care. The next step in the health plan industry's evolution was the consumer-directed health plan (CDHP), in which the consumer is directly involved in the cost of care. CDHPs and the rise of consumer choice will be discussed in Modules 9 and 10. 
Notes  
                                                 
1  Kaiser Family Foundation, Health Research and Education Trust (HRET). 2010. Employer Health Benefits 2010 Annual Survey, Summary of Findings. 2
  Sanofi-Aventis U.S., LLC. 2009. HMO-PPO Digest 2009 (Sanofi-Aventis Managed Care Digest Series), pp. 24-27. 3  Ibid., page 28. 4  Ibid. 
5 Kaiser Family Foundation, Health Research and Education Trust (HRET). 2010. Employer Health Benefits 2010 Annual Survey, Summary of Findings. 

8 	Health Plans for Specialty Services 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• explain how a health plan might carve out the delivery of specialty services,  distinguish between the three main types of dental plans, 
• describe the four basic strategies that managed behavioral health organizations (MBHOs) use to manage the delivery of behavioral healthcare services, and   list some of the services offered by a pharmacy benefit management (PBM) plan. 
In the past managed care plans focused on basic medical care—physician and hospital services. But today consumers want other health services, such as dental care, vision care, behavioral (mental) healthcare, and prescription drugs, to be included in their health plans, and employers have responded by offering benefits for these specialty services. 
Specialty services are healthcare services that are generally considered outside standard medical-surgical services because of the specialized knowledge required for service delivery and management. Specialty services often involve different types of providers and delivery systems than standard medical services. Specialty services may include: 
dental care vision care behavioral healthcare prescription drugs chiropractics 
other forms of complementary and alternative medicine such as acupuncture and naturopathy rehabilitation services chronic disease care home healthcare cardiac surgery oncology services 
certain diagnostic services, such as radiology and magnetic resonance imaging 
Managed care approaches for many specialty services are still in a developmental stage. For others, health plans have found that the application of focused management techniques can yield cost savings and promote quality care. Employers and health plans have two options for arranging and managing the delivery of specialty services: 
• They can develop and maintain their own programs.  
• They can carve out the delivery and management of these services.  
The term carve-out carries several different meanings in the healthcare industry. In a general sense, a carve-out refers to the separation of a medical service (or a group of services) from the basic set of benefits in some way. The separation may be either through a different compensation method for providers or through the use of a separate network or delivery system. For example, a health plan might carve out its HIV/AIDS disease management services from its other medical services by contracting with an external company to develop and manage the program. The health plan, however, still retains accountability for the HIV/AIDS services. This type of carve-out is the one that is relevant to our discussion of specialty services. 
In this module we will discuss the use of carve-outs as a means of delivering specialty services. We will then provide a more detailed discussion of three specialty services that are frequently carved out of the basic set of benefits: dental care, behavioral healthcare, and prescription drug benefits. 
Carve-Outs 
Carve-Outs Emerge 
As costs in all areas of healthcare increased in the late 1970s and early 1980s, some health plans began exploring ways of applying managed care techniques to specialty services. These pioneering organizations found that within certain specialties, the application of focused management techniques seemed to yield cost savings. 
Independent organizations, whose primary purpose was to deliver a particular specialty service, also began to apply managed care techniques to manage those services. In some instances these independent organizations were able to deliver specialty services more affordably and more effectively than health plans. As a result, many health plans began to contract with these independent organizations to deliver such services. 
Health plans often carve out specialty services that have one or more of the following characteristics: 
 an easily defined benefit,  a defined patient population,  high or rising costs, and/or   inappropriate utilization.  
Comprehensive Carve-Out Arrangements  
In a comprehensive carve-out arrangement, a health plan transfers to the carve-out organization the authority to conduct all the activities necessary to deliver and manage the specialty service. Such activities may include network management, quality management, utilization review, case management, and claims administration. In a partial carve-out arrangement, the health plan retains the management of selected activities. 
Compensation for comprehensive carve-outs in mature health plan markets is typically on a capitation basis. In less mature markets, in partial carve-outs, and for services that do not have well-defined patterns of utilization, compensation is often based on fee-forservice or a fee plus a percentage of savings. 
Although many carve-out arrangements have produced favorable outcomes for members, providers, and health plans, there is some concern that healthcare may become too fragmented with numerous carve-out arrangements. Additionally, state legislation may affect the way health plans manage and deliver specialty services. For example, laws in some states mandate that HMOs arrange and manage the delivery of certain specialty services to retain their HMO licenses. Similarly, state consumer protection laws may seek to ensure that health plan members receive integrated, quality care. These concerns have prompted some HMOs and other health plans to roll previously carved-out services back into the basic bundle of services they deliver to their members. 
Specialty HMOs 
Some states provide for the formation of specialty health maintenance organizations for specialty services. A specialty health maintenance organization (specialty HMO) is an organization that uses an HMO model to provide healthcare services to a subset or single specialty of medical care. Typical specialty HMOs include dental HMOs, vision HMOs, and behavioral health HMOs. Although they are based on an HMO model, specialty HMOs may differ greatly in structure and operations from basic medical HMOs. In states which specify a broad range of services that must be provided by a licensed HMO, specialty HMOs are not an option. In those states, managed specialty service organizations do exist, but not in the legal form of a specialty HMO.  
Dental Care 
The term managed dental care was once synonymous with dental HMOs, and later it was used to refer to other network-based plans as well. Today virtually any plan that includes some level of oversight of provider fees, utilization, quality of care, and other such matters could be considered managed dental care.1  
Managed dental care has grown, as more employers have sponsored dental benefits and as those benefits have been increasingly provided by health plans. A large majority (93 percent in 2008) of very large employers (500 or more employees) offer dental coverage,2 and a majority (56.6 percent in 2007) of Americans have dental coverage.3 
And a large and growing majority of this coverage is managed care (see table). 
Dental Plan Enrollees by Plan Type4 
Plan Type 2001 2008 Percentage Change  2008 vs. 2001* Indemnity 38% 14% -63% PPO 39% 66% 69% HMO 15% 8% -47%  
One reason for the growth in managed dental care is an increased willingness of dentists to affiliate with health plans. The costs of maintaining a dental practice have risen steadily, and an oversupply of dentists in some areas has made it difficult for dentists to acquire or retain market share, making participation in health plans attractive. Another cause of this growth is that managed plans are generally less costly to purchasers than traditional indemnity plans.  
The three main types of managed dental plans are dental health maintenance organizations (DHMOs), dental preferred provider organizations (dental PPOs), and dental point-of-service (dental POS) options.  
Dental Health Maintenance Organizations 
A dental health maintenance organization (DHMO) (also known as a capitated plan) has the following characteristics: 
• Members must see a network dentist, except for emergencies and in some cases specialty services when network specialists are unavailable.  
• Dentists are usually paid on a capitation basis, meaning that they assume the majority of financial risk for providing all necessary services in exchange for a guaranteed cash flow.  
• Members pay a small portion of costs by making copayments based on a schedule. There are usually no annual deductibles, coinsurance, or yearly maximums. Copayments are not charged for diagnostic and preventive services, which are fully covered by the dentist’s capitation payment. 
DHMOs almost always have the smallest network, lowest cost, least amount of choice, and greatest restrictions when compared to the other types of dental plans.  
Many dentists are reluctant to join DHMOs because of the low reimbursement and financial risk. Plan administrators have taken measures to enlarge DHMO networks by providing supplemental payments to dentists for certain procedures, guaranteeing them a minimum income per member, or reducing their financial risk or increasing their compensation in other ways.  
As the table above shows, DHMOs make up a small portion of the market, and this share has been declining. In fact, for many years industry experts have been predicting their demise. But this has not happened, because DHMOs serve a need. They have a small but loyal following among individuals who are dentally needy and/or very pricesensitive and willing to trade freedom of choice and a large network for low cost. 
Dental Preferred Provider Organizations 
A dental preferred provider organization (dental PPO) has the following attributes: 
• Members can see the dentist of their choice—they do have to use a network dentist. However, they generally pay less if they stay in network. It is common for a PPO to have a lower deductible, lower coinsurance, and a higher annual maximum for in-network care. Or a plan may require a member who visits an outof-network dentist to pay the difference between that dentist’s fees and an innetwork dentist’s discounted fees.  
• Dentist reimbursement is commonly based on a fee schedule (discounted feefor-service). Affiliated dentists also agree to other requirements and administrative oversight provisions, such as maintaining an active license to practice, having a minimum level of liability insurance, and cooperating with audits, quality assessment, utilization management, dispute resolution, and others. 
• Members pay an annual deductible and coinsurance. The deductible is generally $25 to $75 for an individual and $75 to $150 for a family. The coinsurance percentage members pay is typically 20 percent for basic services such as fillings and 50 percent for major services such as crowns. There is no deductible or coinsurance for diagnostic and preventive services. There is usually also an annual maximum benefit, generally $1,000 to $2,500. 
Point-of-Service (POS) Option 
Definitions of a point-of-service (POS) option vary. For our purposes, we define a POS program as any that involves a combination of networks, where members can choose any dentist (including out-of-network) and the benefit level and provider reimbursement vary accordingly. The most distinguishing feature of POS plans is that members do not have to choose any particular dentist or network during annual open enrollment—they are free to switch at will, depending on their needs and preferences, with the benefit available being determined at the point of service. Usually a member who goes out of network incurs higher out-of-pocket costs. The most common POS program in dental benefits involves combinations of PPOs and DHMOs. Behavioral Healthcare 
The treatment of mental disorders and substance abuse is known as behavioral healthcare. Such problems are widespread in the U.S. population—in a given year about one quarter of adults are diagnosable for one or more disorder, and about 6 percent suffer from a seriously debilitating mental illness. And the incidence among young people is even higher—nearly half of teenagers have had some sort of mental disorder or substance abuse problem during their lives, and about one in five have had a serious mental illness. Because of the high frequency of these conditions, their treatment is a major component of the healthcare system. In 2008 13.4 percent of adults in the United States received some form of behavioral healthcare.5 
Controlling Behavioral Healthcare Costs—Initial Strategies 
Decades ago behavioral healthcare represented a very small percentage of healthcare spending. But beginning in the early 1980s, the demand for services rose. This was caused by increases in people’s awareness of mental health and substance abuse problems, in the social acceptability of treatment, in the availability of behavioral health services, and perhaps also in the stress on individuals and families.  
As a result of this rising demand, behavioral healthcare costs to health plans and sponsoring employers soared. To control costs and limit their financial liability, plans sought to reduce the utilization of inappropriate or unnecessary services. But existing utilization management strategies were not designed for the complexities of behavioral healthcare and were not effective.  
So plans turned to special cost-sharing, benefit limits, and exclusions for behavioral healthcare. Some plans charged higher deductibles or coinsurance for behavioral care than for medical care. Some limited the number of outpatient visits and inpatient care days covered each year and placed annual and lifetime dollar caps on behavioral care benefits. Some excluded or limited coverage of certain illnesses (such as chronic illnesses, organic psychoses, and personality disorders); services (inpatient psychiatric services, long-term outpatient treatment, and marital counseling); and populations (geriatric patients, patients with developmental disabilities, substance abusers). Ultimately, these strategies did little to reduce costs, and in some cases they limited access to necessary and appropriate care. They also led to mental health parity legislation, which restricts a plan’s ability to impose special cost-sharing and limitations on behavioral healthcare, as discussed below.  
Second Generation Strategies 
A managed behavioral health organization (MBHO) provides behavioral healthcare services and implements health plan techniques. MBHOs emerged in the 1980s, and health plans and employers turned to them for access to care and cost management. 
MBHOs’ specialized knowledge and experience in behavioral healthcare enable them to determine which services were necessary and appropriate for particular patients and to deliver the types of services that led to better outcomes. MBHOs use four basic strategies to manage the delivery of services: alternative treatment levels, alternative treatment settings, alternative treatment methods, and crisis intervention. MBHOs have also developed mechanisms to help match these services with patients’ needs. 
Alternative Treatment Levels 
People with behavioral disorders have a wide range of care needs. There are a large number of disorders, and the severity of a particular disorder can vary dramatically among different patients and in the same patient over time. Many patients suffer multiple disorders. To meet these varied needs, MBHOs cover the following levels of care: 
• Acute care is for those who need continuous, intensive, individualized care, often in conjunction with medical care. This is the most secure and restrictive level of care. 
• Post-acute care is for those who need continuous monitoring in a safe, structured environment but not acute care.  
• Partial hospitalization is for those who need substantial care and supervision but not 24-hour monitoring. Patients in partial hospitalization programs typically spend part of the day or week in a facility and part outside working or attending school. Many programs are designed to treat substance abuse. 
• Intensive outpatient care is for those who need extensive individual or group therapy but not continuous care and supervision in a confined setting. Such patients may attend therapy sessions for several hours per day, several days per week.  
• Outpatient care is for those who need less frequent therapy (once or twice a week or once a month) and shorter sessions (typically one hour or less) compared to intensive outpatient care. Outpatient care is the least intensive and restrictive level of care. 
The level of care a patient receives typically depends on the risk to himself, others, and property; his ability to function effectively at home or in the community; and his medical needs. 
Alternative Treatment Settings  
Behavioral healthcare can be delivered effectively in a variety of settings. Acute care is typically provided in psychiatric hospitals, psychiatric units of general hospitals, or hospital observation units. These facilities are equipped to address the needs of patients who pose a significant risk to themselves or others, are unable to function without assistance or supervision, or have suffered acute episodes such as drug overdoses. Post-acute care is most often provided in subacute care facilities. Partial hospitalization programs are typically in psychiatric hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, or halfway houses. Outpatient care takes place in the offices of therapists and mental health clinics. 
Alternative Treatment Methods  
Behavioral healthcare involves a variety of approaches. These include drug therapy, psychotherapy, and counseling, sometimes in combination. Psychotherapy may be brief and goal-oriented or last a long time, and it may be administered individually or to groups. Methods used with children and adolescents often differ from those for adults. 
There is also a variety of care providers. In some cases services are provided by psychologists, psychiatric nurses, licensed clinical social workers (LCSWs), or marriage, family, and child counselors (MFCCs). In other cases care is provided by psychiatrists, who can prescribe medications as well as conduct psychotherapy and counseling. 
Crisis Intervention  
One of the key elements of behavioral healthcare is crisis intervention—the intensive treatment of acute episodes of a mental disorder. The purpose is to keep the patient safe and to stabilize his condition so that he can begin psychotherapy or other treatment. Appropriate treatment in the acute phase of a behavioral health disorder helps reduce the likelihood of recurrent acute episodes. Directing Patients to Appropriate Care  
Assessing members’ behavioral healthcare needs and providing quality services to meet those needs are important aspects of managed behavioral care. Directing members to the most appropriate services in order to manage costs and utilization is also important. In many health plans and MBHOs members can access behavioral healthcare services directly, but in others they must go through a gatekeeper or referral process. Three common approaches are primary care providers (PCPs), centralized referral systems, and employee assistance programs. 
PCPs as Gatekeepers 
In the past some plans required members to access behavioral healthcare services through a primary care provider. The PCP assessed a member's needs, gave her a referral to a behavioral healthcare specialist, and sometimes authorized payment for services. But this has become much less common. Although incorporating behavioral healthcare into primary care promotes coordination and continuity of care and supports utilization management, PCPs often lack the knowledge and experience needed to diagnose behavioral problems and determine whether services are needed and if so what kind. 
Centralized Referral Systems 
Some health plans and MBHOs have a centralized behavioral healthcare referral system. Members call and talk to a mental health/substance abuse case manager, who conducts an initial assessment and refers the member to the appropriate provider for treatment or a more detailed evaluation. Today such systems are much more common than PCP gatekeepers, as they offer quicker access to care and often a more accurate diagnosis, more effective treatment, and more efficient use of resources (although they may decrease coordination and continuity of care). 
Employee Assistance Programs 
Another way people can be directed to appropriate behavioral healthcare services is through employee assistance programs (EAPs) established by employers or MBHOs. EAPs are frequently the first point of contact for employees and family members in need of information or assistance regarding behavioral problems. EAP professionals generally encounter behavioral problems early and can direct plan members to providers and services before a problem turns into a crisis. But unlike PCPs or case managers, EAP professionals may not have the background necessary to diagnose behavioral disorders and may lack experience with managed behavioral health programs. 
Other Strategies 
MBHOs and health plans manage quality and cost in other ways as well. They develop clinical practice guidelines—recommendations for providers on the best treatment approaches (discussed in detail in a later module)—which improve patient outcomes and reduce the use of inappropriate services. In many cases they direct members to effective outpatient services instead of unnecessary and more costly inpatient care. They negotiate with providers for reduced fees and greater acceptance of practice guidelines in exchange for increased patient volume. More recently, they have focused on the development of alternative treatment options, the incorporation of community-based resources into the healthcare system, case management, and the better integration of behavioral care and primary care. 
In recent years there has been an increased focus on long-term outcomes. For instance, it has been found that in some cases higher-cost drugs result in lower overall costs because of fewer office visits and hospitalizations and greater patient acceptance and compliance. Another example: In some cases (especially in substance abuse) increasing coverage for follow-up treatment can reduce relapses, resulting in lower long-term costs. 
Mental Health Parity 
An important issue in behavioral healthcare is mental health parity—equivalent coverage of behavioral healthcare and medical care. As we have seen, to limit their liability in the face of rapidly rising costs, some health plans provided more limited benefits for behavioral care than for medical care, and many mental health advocates contended that this was unfair. In response, Congress enacted the Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 (MHPA) and the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA).  
Neither MHPA nor MHPAEA requires health plans to cover behavioral healthcare, but if a group plan with more than 50 members does cover it, the plan must comply with certain parity rules. MHPA requires that lifetime and annual dollar caps on benefits for behavioral care not be lower than for medical care. MHPAEA continues this requirement and adds the following:6 
• Cost-sharing and out-of-pocket limits for behavioral care cannot be greater than for medical care. 
• Limitations on behavioral coverage (such as on the number of visits or the frequency or duration of treatment) can be no more restrictive than for medical care. Nonquantitative limitations, such as medical management and preauthorization, also cannot be more restrictive. 
• If a health plan pays benefits for out-of-network medical care it must do so for behavioral care as well. 
• MHPAEA extends these rules (including those of MHPA on lifetime and annual caps) to substance abuse treatment (which was not covered by MHPA). 
It should be emphasized that MHPA and MHPAEA do not require a health plan to provide behavioral healthcare benefits, but if a plan does so it must comply with the above rules. Both laws do not apply to individual policies or group plans with 50 or fewer members. They do apply both to insurers and to employers with self-insured (selffunded) plans (with some exemptions). Finally, it should be noted that some states have mental health parity laws that go beyond this federal legislation. 
Pharmacy Benefit Plans 
Prescription drugs account for a substantial portion of all U.S. healthcare spending—in 
2009 more than 3.6 billion prescriptions were filled, at a cost of over $200 billion, more 

than 10 percent of all healthcare expenditures.7 And drug costs have generally risen at an even faster rate than overall medical costs. This has prompted employers and health plans to focus on managing the cost and utilization of pharmaceuticals. 8 
But drugs also play a role in the quality of healthcare. For example, a significant portion of hospital admissions of people 65 and older result from the inappropriate use of prescription drugs, and this often occurs because several healthcare providers are treating the same patient and prescribing drugs for her without knowledge of her other prescriptions, leading to harmful drug interactions. This problem can be addressed by tracking and coordinating members’ drug use. 
The Pharmacy Benefit Management (PBM) Plan 
In response to rising costs and quality of care issues, pharmacy benefit management plans emerged. A pharmacy benefit management (PBM) plan (also know as a prescription benefit management plan) is a specialty health plan designed to contain the costs of prescription drugs while promoting more efficient and safer use of them. The great majority of health plans contract with PBMs. PBMs use various managed care cost-control techniques, and they promote quality in a number of ways. For instance, a PBM may screen for drug interactions, using integrated data systems that provide a link among the provider, the health plan, and the pharmacy network. A PBM may promote quality in prescribing among providers through feedback and reporting. 
Clinical Services Offered by PBMs 
Pharmacy benefit management plans typically interact with physicians and pharmacists in performing four types of clinical services: physician profiling, drug utilization review, formulary management, and prior authorization. These services are not unique to PBMs; they may also be performed by health plans, hospitals, retail pharmacies, or other specialty organizations. 
Physician Profiling  
Physician profiling consists of compiling data on physicians’ prescribing patterns and comparing the actual prescribing patterns of individual doctors for select drug categories to those of most doctors. Peer comparison is typically based on medical specialty and region. The PBM then seeks to educate doctors whose patterns differ from the norm, reviewing with them the appropriateness and cost of their prescribing patterns through mailings, telephone calls, and face-to-face visits. 
Drug Utilization Review  
Drug utilization review (DUR) is a program that evaluates whether drugs are being used safely, effectively, and appropriately. DUR is an important component of quality management programs because it promotes patient safety by identifying potential and actual problems related to the ordering, dispensing, administration, and use of drugs. Drug utilization review programs identify problems with:  
 	inappropriate dosage,  overuse identified from early refills,  underuse identified through late refills,  the length of time a medication is taken,  duplication,  side effects, and drug interactions. 
PBMs monitor an individual patient’s drug problems through prospective (before drug therapy), concurrent (during drug therapy), or retrospective (after dispensing or postdrug therapy) review. Patient-specific DUR is typically used to identify the following potential problems: 
drug-disease conflicts,  drug-drug interactions,  chronic overutilization,  underutilization (noncompliance),  drug-sex and drug-age conflicts, and drug-pregnancy contraindications.  
Computerized systems at the point of dispensing play an important role in reducing the incidence of these problems. Following up with physician and patient education programs is an integral component of DUR. 
Formulary Management 
A formulary is a listing of drugs, classified by therapeutic category or disease class, that are considered preferred therapy for a given managed population and that are to be used by a health plan's providers in prescribing medications. The formulary is usually developed by an independent panel comprised of physicians, pharmacists, and other clinical experts. 
Formularies can be either closed or open. In a closed formulary only those drugs on the preferred list are covered by the health plan. In an open formulary drugs not on the preferred list are covered, but the plan member usually pays more in cost-sharing for them (as discussed below). Open formularies are more common today.  
Copayment amounts are often based in part on formularies. Two common approaches are two-tier and three-tier copayment structures. A two-tier structure requires that a member pay one copayment amount for a generic drug and a higher copayment amount for a brand-name drug. A three-tier structure requires a member to pay one copayment amount for a generic drug, a higher amount for a brand-name drug included on the health plan’s formulary, and an even higher amount for a nonformulary drug. 
Formularies are often a key program that a PBM or health plan uses to negotiate for rebates from drug manufacturers. A rebate is a reduction in the price of a particular pharmaceutical obtained from the manufacturer. Most PBMs enter into discount rebate agreements with pharmaceutical manufacturers, under which the PBM receives a rebate on the price of a drug and in exchange the manufacturer has fewer restrictions on getting its drug into the PBM’s formulary than companies without such an agreement. 
However, the PBM’s formulary panel must be careful to ensure the quality of the pharmaceuticals that it endorses by including in the formulary the safest, most medically effective, and cost-effective drugs. 
Most PBMs use their formulary to perform generic and therapeutic substitution. Generic substitution is the dispensing of a generic equivalent; therapeutic substitution is the dispensing of a different chemical entity within the same drug class. Generic substitution can be performed without physician approval in most cases, but therapeutic substitution always requires physician approval. Many PBMs use benefit design (such as copayment differentials) to encourage both therapeutic and generic substitution. 
Prior Authorization  
Prior authorization, sometimes known as a medical necessity review, is a program that requires physicians to obtain certification of medical necessity before prescribing a drug. Many PBMs have established protocols for physicians to receive prior authorization over the telephone, using a semi-automated system. In some of these programs, the physician is prompted through a series of interactive menus requesting clinical and patient information. At the end of the telephone menus, the physician is either given a prior authorization number or connected to a pharmacist, who asks further questions. 
Other Services Offered by PBMs  
PBMs also offer a number of services to members, providers, and health plans that can control costs and improve convenience. 
Mail-Order Pharmacies 
In a mail-order pharmacy program drugs are ordered and delivered through the mail to members at a reduced cost. Some PBMs operate their own mail-order pharmacy services, while others contract with outside vendors. PBMs that operate their own program generally negotiate a high-volume purchase contract with each drug manufacturer and pass the cost savings on to their clients. PBMs that contract this operation out usually negotiate a discounted rate with the vendor based on the size of the pharmacy network. This discounted rate is applied to all drugs that are covered under the PBM’s mail-order contract with the vendor.  
Card Services  
PBMs may also use pharmaceutical card services to facilitate the processing and tracking of pharmaceutical claims. Pharmaceutical cards, also known as drug cards or prescription cards, are identification cards issued by the PBM to plan members. A member must present her card to a participating pharmacist to receive PBM benefits. The card identifies the plan a person belongs to and other information the pharmacist needs, such as the copayment amount. Some PBMs do not issue separate pharmaceutical cards but use the health plan member identification card as a pharmaceutical card.  
A pharmaceutical card program allows a PBM to process a claim electronically when a prescription is filled by a pharmacist. It also enables the PBM to transmit information to the pharmacist about ingredient duplicates, therapeutic duplicates, severe drug interactions, early refills, age precautions, benefit restrictions, etc.  
PBM Contractual Arrangements 
PBMs typically operate under one of three contractual arrangements: fee-for-service, risk sharing, and capitation. 
Fee-for-Service 
Under fee-for-service arrangements, the PBM creates a retail pharmacy network that offers discounts on prescription drugs and can perform online claims processing. For each prescription filled for members of a health plan, the plan pays the PBM a claims administration fee. However, the health plan generally saves money compared to unmanaged drug benefits. 
Risk Sharing 
A risk-sharing contract may be used when an employer contracts with a PBM to manage pharmacy benefits. The PBM and the employer agree on a target cost per employee per month. If the actual cost per employee per month is greater than the target, the PBM pays part of the cost overrun, and if the actual cost is less than the target, the PBM shares in the savings.  
The PBM bases the target cost per employee per month on a combination of factors: price discounts (a percent reduction in the average wholesale price), rebates for formulary products, and savings from clinical services. The target cost per employee per month may be disease-specific or related to therapeutic drug class. 
Capitation 
Under a capitation contract, a PBM agrees to provide all pharmaceutical services in exchange for a fixed dollar amount per employee per month. Capitation contracts are increasing in popularity, but not quickly. One reason for this slow growth may be that PBMs have not yet determined how to accurately project or account for future pharmaceutical expenditures. Also, many employers are hesitant to put in place strong utilization control measures (such as prior authorization and closed formularies), particularly when they may affect a negotiated benefit of a trade union.  
Notes 
                                                 
1
  Some content in this section is adapted from the dental module of AHIP’s FHIAS course, written by Cathye Lynne Smithwick RDH MA, Consultant to the Health Care Industry. 2  Mercer National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans. 2008 Survey Report. 3  National Association of Dental Plans (NADP) and Delta Dental Plans Association (DDPA). 
August 2007. ?Dental Benefits Joint Report: Enrollment.?  4  National Association of Dental Plans (NADP) and Delta Dental Plans Association (DDPA). 2009. 
?Dental Benefits Joint Report: Enrollment.?  5  National Institute of Mental Health. 2010. www.nihm.nih.gov/statistics.  
                                                                                                                                                 
6
  Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). 2010. ?Fact Sheet: The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA)? www.cms.gov  7  The Kaiser Family Foundation. www.StateHealthFacts.org. 8  Some content in this section is adapted from Drug Benefit Trends (1995, 7(2): 6–10), ©1997, SCP Communications, Inc., and subsequently on Medscape, http://www.medscape.com (10 March 1997). Used with permission. 

9 	The Move to Consumer Choice 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 identify the factors that have driven the recent movement toward consumer choice,   discuss the general philosophy of the consumer choice approach,   describe the CDHP models, and   discuss the benefits of CDHPs. 
In recent years employers and health plans have led an effort to empower consumers to play a greater role in their healthcare decisions and assume a greater responsibility for the cost of care. This module provides an overview of this move to consumer choice. We will examine the factors that gave rise to this trend and the consumer choice philosophy. We will describe the evolution of consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs) from early efforts to the more recent and more successful models, particularly health savings accounts (HSAs). And we will conclude by reviewing the benefits of CDHPs, as shown in recent studies.  
Factors Driving the Rise of Consumer Choice 
For the better part of the 1990s, healthcare spending rose more slowly than in the 1980s. Industry observers generally attributed this to the success health plans had with network-based healthcare. But in the late 1990s spending again began to increase, peaking around 2002 (see Figure 9.1)1  
Figure 9.1 
 
The new surge in healthcare costs directly affected health plan premiums. During the height of the recent cost upswing, premiums were increasing by more than 13 percent annually, according to an analysis conducted for AHIP.2 This analysis determined that increased utilization was the largest factor contributing to the premium rise, accounting for 43 percent (see Figure 9.2). In response, employer payors began seeking ways to control spiraling utilization rates and provide lower-cost health coverage options. 
 
 	Figure 9.2 	Factors Contributing to Premium Increases3 

The jump in healthcare costs in the late 1990s coincided with a shift toward less restrictive forms of managed care. Enrollment in network-based health plans had grown substantially during the 1990s (see Figure 9.3)4, and by 1996 they accounted for nearly three of four covered lives, compared with a mere one in four just eight years earlier.5 As these network plans came to dominate the market, consumers began to bristle at practices they believed limited their choice of and access to providers. In response, employers began offering less restrictive types of plans (such as preferred provider organizations (PPOs), point-of-service (POS) plans, and open-access arrangements), and policymakers in many states passed "anti-managed-care" measures aimed at increasing choice and access. 
The marketplace responded by dropping prior authorization requirements and offering a wider selection of PPO, POS, open-access, and tiered-copayment products. These plans offered consumers more choice but also more responsibility, further advancing the concept of consumer-directed healthcare. 
Figure 9.3 
 
The Role of the Internet  
Internet technology and widespread consumer access to it have also facilitated the rise of consumer-directed healthcare. Over the past decade health plan websites have evolved from static sources of basic plan information to elaborate, interactive portals. Many of these sites now allow consumers to make their own purchasing decisions, learn more about various treatment options, and better manage their healthcare needs by accessing disease management and self-care information. 
For example, United Healthcare's consumer-oriented website (myuhc, see Figure 9.4) provides secure, password-protected access to personalized benefit and claims information, data related to provider quality and cost, and even a hospital comparison tool that allows users to assess and select the best facility for a specific procedure. Having access to these powerful, interactive decision-making tools helps empower consumers to make informed decisions about the cost and quality of the healthcare they purchase. 
Figure 9.4 
 
The Consumer Choice Philosophy 
The movement toward consumer choice may represent one of the greatest paradigm shifts in the healthcare market since the rise of managed care. At its core consumer choice involves empowering healthcare consumers to play a greater role in the purchase of their healthcare services, while simultaneously giving them greater responsibility for the cost of that care. It represents a fundamental shift away from the traditional thirdparty payment approach, which for years has left the consumer with little awareness of or concern about the cost of the services he or she uses. 
The expectation is that if consumers have increased decision-making power and financial responsibility they will become more judicious in the way they purchase healthcare services as well as in the type and amount of services they use. By having more "skin in the game," consumers have a greater incentive to get the best product, service, and value for their money. 
Consumer-Directed Health Plans 
Under the consumer choice paradigm, employers choose an insurance carrier or thirdparty administrator to manage benefits and the network and to pay claims. Benefits are provided through a consumer-directed health plan (CDHP), a health plan design that combines financial incentives with information about cost and quality to help consumers make better-informed decisions about their healthcare. CDHPs typically have two components: 
• A high-deductible (or “catastrophic”) health plan (HDHP). Such a plan does not pay for the first few thousand dollars of healthcare expenses (the deductible) but usually covers most if not all costs above this amount.  
• A tax-advantaged personal healthcare account. Account funds can be used to pay for healthcare expenses before the deductible is satisfied, and such funds are generally exempt from taxation. 
Because HDHPs do not pay for the first few thousand dollars of expenses, they generally have lower premiums than traditional plans, and the money saved can be used to help fund the personal healthcare account. 
The Evolution of Consumer Choice Models 
CDHPs are not new. They were introduced in the late 1970s, and they have been retooled several times since. All CDHP products provide federal tax advantages while allowing consumers to save money for their healthcare, but each has a unique design and is subject to a unique set of federal rules. Early CDHP models had limited popularity because of restrictions that consumers disliked, but more recent plan types have attempted to improve on earlier models in an effort to widen consumer appeal. 
Flexible Spending Accounts (FSAs) 
Flexible spending accounts (FSAs), a type of benefit arrangement offered under a employer’s cafeteria plan, were introduced in the late 1970s and are the oldest type of personal healthcare account. FSAs are established by employers, and employees may elect to participate in them for reimbursement of certain expenses while saving money on taxes. There are dependent care FSAs (used mostly for child care expenses) and healthcare FSAs for uninsured (out-of-pocket) medical expenses. 
Employers, employees, or both may contribute to an FSA, although most often only the employee contributes. Before the start of the plan year, employees designate the amount they want deducted from their wages that year and contributed to their FSA, and equal amounts are withheld from each paycheck throughout the year. However, employers must make the full annual amount elected by the employee available at the start of the plan year.  
Example: Chloe chooses to contribute $1,200 annually to her FSA, so $50 is deducted from each semi-monthly paycheck. But from the start of the year, she can receive $1,200 in reimbursement. So when she incurs $500 in expenses in January, they are reimbursed, even though she contributed only $50. 
In 2008 22 percent of employees of large firms participated in a healthcare FSA, and participation was considerably lower in small firms.6 The limited popularity of FSAs is partly the result of design-related restrictions on funding and use, including these rules: 
• The "use-it-or-lose-it" rule. FSA balances must be used during the plan year and may not be "rolled over" to the following year. (Some employers have a two-anda-half-month ?grace period.?) 
• The lack of portability. Employees who change jobs or retire cannot take FSAs with them. 
Archer Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs) 
Archer medical savings accounts (MSAs) are tax-exempt trust or custodial accounts authorized as a demonstration project by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). MSAs were limited to helping self-employed individuals and employees of small businesses obtain reimbursement of medical care costs. Participants had to enroll in an MSA-qualified high-deductible health plan. 
In regard to rollover and portability, MSAs provided considerably greater flexibility than FSAs, but nonetheless they failed to achieve popularity during their demonstration period. The demonstration program was phased out at the end of 2007, and MSAs were essentially replaced by health savings accounts (HSAs) (see below). 
Health Reimbursement Arrangements (HRAs) 
Health reimbursement arrangements (HRAs) were introduced by employers in 2000 (although they were not officially recognized as HRAs until 2002). The establishment and funding of HRAs is limited exclusively to employers; self-employed individuals are not eligible, and employees cannot make contributions. HRA funds may (at the option of the employer) be rolled over from year to year tax-free, increasing their appeal. There is some limited portability. 
Employer ?contributions? are something of a misnomer, as no funding is required until an employee submits a claim for reimbursement. Essentially, an HRA is an employer’s agreement that it will reimburse for allowed healthcare expenses up to a certain amount. Employer reimbursements from an HRA are not taxable income for the employee, and the employer can deduct (as a business expense) the amount it actually reimburses. There is no regulatory limit to the amount an employer may reimburse through an HRA, although all employers set their own limits. 
A survey of employers found that between 2 and 3 percent of workers covered by health insurance were enrolled in an HRA between 2006 and 2009.7 Although employees like the rollover feature (when offered by their employer) and tax-free reimbursement, they dislike that the fact that the account might not be portable if they change companies. 
Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) 
The Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003 amended the Internal Revenue Code to provide an income tax deduction to individuals for amounts contributed to a health savings account (HSA), and this accelerated the consumer-directed healthcare movement. The HSA is designed to address several of the limitations of earlier personal healthcare accounts. It provides for funding by both employees and employers, direct employee ownership of the account, true account portability, year-to-year rollover, and investment opportunities (see Table 9.1). 
Table 9.1 
Comparing FSAs, HRAs, and HSAs 
 FSA HRA HSA Funded by Employee (and sometimes employer) Employer only Employee, employer, or individual Portable? No Limited, at employer option Yes Annual roll-over? No Employer option Yes Earns interest? No No Yes  
To set up and contribute to an HSA, an individual must be covered by a high-deductible health plan that meets specific federal requirements (a qualified high-deductible health plan). She must also not have other health insurance that is not a highdeductible plan, not be enrolled in Medicare, and not be claimed as a dependent on someone else's tax return. 
To be an HSA-qualified HDHP, a plan must have an annual deductible of at least $1,200 for self-only coverage or $2,400 for family coverage (2010 and 2011, adjusted annually). 
A qualified HDHP must also have an annual limit on out-of-pocket expenses (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) no greater than $5,950 for self-only coverage and $11,900 for family coverage. The deductible and out-of-pocket limit of a qualified HDHP must apply to all benefits, including prescription drugs, covered by the plan. The only exception is preventive care, which may be exempted from the deductible. 
The Benefits of CDHPs 
The movement toward consumer choice models has increased health coverage by making available a more affordable option for individuals and small employers, and it has also provided large employers with additional tools to control their health benefit costs. In addition, CDHPs empower consumers to manage their own healthcare, giving them strong incentives to shop around for products and services that represent the greatest value for their healthcare dollars. 
But not everyone is convinced that CDHPs are a good idea. Critics claim that the consumer choice movement is merely an effort to shift even more costs to individuals. They contend that CDHPs are a good choice only for the healthy and wealthy and will lead to adverse selection. Some worry that consumers may avoid necessary medical treatment because of cost concerns and will not take advantage of preventive care services. 
However, a number of studies of CDHPs have now been conducted,8 and they provide support for the following conclusions:  
• Switching from traditional health insurance to a CDHP brings substantial cost reductions, and there are indications that CDHP costs rise at a lower rate than in traditional coverage. 
• Cost savings are not the result of insureds not receiving necessary care, but rather come from cost-effective consumer choices that do not compromise quality of care or health. These include greater use of preventive care and generic drugs, less inappropriate use of emergency room care, and better management of chronic conditions. 
• Most employers are not shifting costs to employees. 
Enrollment Trends 
Participation in CDHPs is growing, as the following statistics show: 
• Enrollment in CDHPs rose to an estimated 23 million people in 2009, up from 18 million in 2008, a 27 percent increase in just one year.9  
• Enrollment in HSA/HDHP combinations increased about ten-fold between 2005 and 2010, and these plans now cover more than 10 million people (see Figure 
9.5).10  
 In 2009 22.7 percent of the under-65 population was enrolled in an HDHP, up from 19.4 percent in the previous year.11  
Market analysts expect these trends to continue, with participation in CDHPs increasing rapidly in the near future.12 Because FSAs and HRAs have been around for some time, most of the new demand will be for HSAs, so in the near term health plans and CDHP vendors will focus on meeting employer and employee demand for HSA products. As the market matures, HSA product functionality and capabilities are expected to evolve to keep pace with employer and consumer needs. Healthcare reform may also have an impact on the CDHP market (discussed in the following module). 

Figure 9.5 
 
Conclusion 
Escalating healthcare expenditures have increased the demand for lower-cost health coverage options that empower consumers and provide incentives for cost-conscious decision-making. This has given rise to the consumer choice movement. Consumerdirected health plans, which have evolved substantially over the past three decades, combine a core contribution by employers with increased choice and financial responsibility for employees. The most recent type of CDHP to emerge—health savings accounts coupled with qualified high-deductible health plans—appears to be meeting the promise of the consumer choice philosophy and will likely see rapid enrollment growth in the years ahead. 
 
Notes 
                                                 
1  America's Health Insurance Plans, "The Factors Fueling Rising Healthcare Costs 2006" (PricewaterhouseCoopers analysis prepared for AHIP), January 2006. 2  Ibid. 
3 Ibid. 
Page 
                                                                                                                                                 
4  Ginsburg, Paul B., "Competition in Health Care: Its Evolution Over the Past Decade," Health Affairs, November/December 2005. 5  Herrick, Devon M., "Flexible Spending Accounts: Making a Good Deal Better," Brief Analysis, National Center for Policy Analysis, December 6, 2004. 
6 Mercer Human Resources Consulting, National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans 
2008. Cited in ?Health Care Flexible Spending Accounts? by Janemarie Mulvey, Congressional Research Service, May 11, 2010.  
7 The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust, Employer Health Benefits 2009 Annual Survey, 2009. Cited in ?Tax-Advantaged Accounts for Health Care Expenses: Side-by-Side Comparison? by Carol Rapaport, Congressional Research Service, June 18, 2010.  8
  American Academy of Actuaries, ?Emerging Data on Consumer-Driven Health Plans,? May 2009. Aetna, ?Sixth Annual Aetna HealthFund Study,? April 2010. Cigna, ?Cigna Choice Fund Experience Study,? December 2009. 
9  American Association of Preferred Provider Organizations, ?Small Employers Lead CDHP Adoption in 2009,? 2010. 
10
  America’s Health Insurance Plans Center for Policy and Research, ?January 2010 Census Shows 10 Million People Covered by HSA/High-Deductible Health Plans,? May 2010. 
11
  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, ?Health Insurance Coverage: Early Release of Estimates from the National Health Interview Survey, January – September 2009,? March 2010. 
12
 Aite Group, ?Consumer-Directed Healthcare: Sizing the Market,? February 2010. 
Page 
Types of Consumer-Directed Health Plans 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• identify high-deductible health plans and the three major types of consumerdirected health plans (CDHPs);  describe the main features of FSAs and HRAs; 
• summarize the HSA rules regarding eligibility, qualified HDHPs, preventive care, contributions, and distributions; and   discuss the potential impact of healthcare reform on CDHPs. 
In the last module we introduced the consumer-directed health plan (CDHP) products available today. In this module we will provide a closer look at flexible spending accounts (FSAs) and health reimbursement arrangements (HRAs) and a detailed examination of the fastest-growing type of CDHP, health savings accounts (HSAs). We will conclude by discussing how healthcare reform legislation may affect these DCHPs. 
Consumer-Directed Health Plans 
In today's healthcare market, employers are looking for lower-cost health coverage options, while consumers are seeking broad choice among providers and more control over their healthcare dollars. Consumer-directed health plans are increasingly popular products that address these needs. 
As discussed in the preceding module, CDHPs generally combine a core funding contribution by employers with increased choice and financial responsibility for employees and greater accountability for health plans and providers. CDHPs typically couple a high-deductible health plan with a tax-advantaged personal healthcare account. 
High-Deductible Health Plans 
Most CDHPs are based on a high-deductible health plan (HDHP), a plan with a considerably higher deductible than traditional insurance products. HDHPs generally have lower premiums than traditional plans, and the money saved can be placed in a personal healthcare account. 
Some HDHPs do not apply the high deductible to preventive care, which has first-dollar coverage or a low copayment. HSA-qualified HDHPs are subject to federal rules that specify minimum deductibles and limit annual out-of-pocket expenses. 
The Three Major Types of CDHPs  
CDHPs are not new. They were introduced in the 1970s and have been retooled in several iterations over the past three decades. This evolution has produced three major types of CDHP accounts: 

 flexible spending account (FSA),   health reimbursement arrangement (HRA), and   health savings account (HSA).  
All of these products provide federal tax advantages while allowing consumers to save money for their healthcare. Each has a unique design and is subject to a unique set of federal rules. 
Flexible Spending Accounts 
Flexible spending accounts (FSAs) were introduced in the late 1970s and are the oldest type of CDHP account. FSAs are established by employers to cover uninsured healthcare expenses or dependent care expenses of their employees. FSAs may be funded by the employee with pretax dollars, by the employer, or both. They may be offered on a stand-alone basis or in conjunction with any type of health insurance plan or other employer-provided benefits. They can be offered under a employer’s cafeteria plan, which may offer a wider spectrum of benefits than just an FSA. An employee can choose to participate in an FSA even if he does not participate in any other benefit plan offered by the employer. Because FSAs can only be established by employers, they are not an option for self-employed individuals. 
In 2007 health FSAs were available to about a third of all workers. But participation is not high—about half of employees of large firms had access to them, but in 2008 only 22 percent participated.1 The limited popularity of FSAs is partly a result of design-related restrictions on funding and use, including the following: 
 “Use-it-or-lose-it” provision. Balances in an FSA may not be rolled over from year to year. Employers have the option of allowing funds for one year to be used for expenses incurred in the first two and a half months of the following year. 
 Lack of portability. Employees who change jobs or retire cannot take FSAs with them, and employers are not allowed to refund FSA balances to employees when they leave. (However, ex-employees continuing their health coverage under COBRA can access funds from their FSA.) 
Health Reimbursement Arrangements 
Health reimbursement arrangements (HRAs) were introduced in 2000 and gained momentum after a 2002 U.S. Treasury Department ruling clarified their treatment in the tax code. The establishment and funding of HRAs is exclusively limited to employers; self-employed individuals are not eligible, and employees cannot make contributions. Employers decide how much money to “contribute” to HRAs, and employees can withdraw funds for expenses allowed under the employer's HRA plan documents. HRAs may be offered on a stand-alone basis or in conjunction with any type of health insurance plan, including an HDHP. 
Unlike with an FSA, HRA funds may, at the option of the employer, be rolled over from year to year tax-free, increasing their appeal. There is some limited portability: As with an FSA, an ex-employee continuing health coverage under COBRA can access her HRA. And unlike an FSA, an employer may structure its HRA to allow balances of employees leaving the company to be rolled over to an HRA of their new employer, and it may allow ex-employees to be reimbursed from their remaining HRA balances for expenses incurred while they were still employed. 
A survey of employers found that between 2 and 3 percent of the workers covered by health insurance were enrolled in an HRA between 2006 and 2009.2 Although employees like the roll-over feature of HRAs, they dislike that the account might not be portable if they change companies. Health Savings Accounts  
The Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003 accelerated the consumer-directed healthcare movement by creating the most recent CDHP option, the health savings account (HSA). The HSA is designed to address several of the limitations of previous personal healthcare account products: It allows funding by both employees and employers and provides for employee (or individual) account ownership, portability, annual rollover, and tax-free investment earnings and gains. 
Eligibility 
To set up and contribute to an HSA, an individual must: 
 be covered by a qualified high-deductible health plan (one that meets federal requirements); 
 not have other broad health coverage that is not an HDHP (Limited coverage such as accident insurance, dental or vision benefits, workers' compensation, disability income insurance, or long-term care insurance is permitted.);  
 not be enrolled in Medicare (Medicare beneficiaries cannot contribute to an HSA, but they may spend money contributed to an HSA before they enrolled in Medicare.); and  
 not be claimed as a dependent on someone else's tax return.  
Qualified HDHPs 
An HSA must be coupled with a qualified high-deductible health plan (an HDHP that meets certain federal requirements). A qualified HDHP must have (2010 and 2011 figures, adjusted annually): 
• an annual deductible of at least $1,200 for self-only coverage or $2,400 for family coverage.  
• an annual limit on out-of-pocket expenses (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) no greater than $5,950 for self-only coverage or $11,900 for family coverage. 
The deductible and out-of-pocket limit must apply to all benefits covered by the plan, including prescription drugs. The only exception permitted is for preventive care services. If an HDHP provides benefits through a network of healthcare providers, the deductible and out-of-pocket limit do not apply to services provided outside of the network. 
Preventive Care  
A qualified HDHP may cover certain types of preventive care without a deductible or with a lower deductible. These services include:  	routine prenatal and well-child care;  	immunizations for children and adults;  	periodic health evaluations, including tests and diagnostic procedures ordered with routine examinations such as annual physicals; 
 	smoking cessation programs;  	obesity/weight-loss programs; and  	screening services (such as mammography, Pap testing, and screening for glaucoma and tuberculosis). 
Also exempt is treatment that is incidental or ancillary to a preventive care service or screening, where it would be unreasonable or impractical to perform another procedure to treat the condition (for instance, the removal of polyps during a diagnostic colonoscopy). 
Limited categories of medications are also considered preventive care, including: 
 medications to prevent a disease or condition when a person has risk factors but no symptoms (for instance, cholesterol-lowering medication to help prevent heart disease for people with high cholesterol); and  
 medications to prevent recurrence of a disease from which a person has recovered (for instance, ACE inhibitors for individuals who previously had a heart attack or stroke).  
Contributions 
The rules allow tax-free contributions to an HSA by an employee, an employer, a selfemployed individual, or a family member on behalf of an eligible individual. Each year the total contributions to an HSA cannot exceed a maximum, $3,050 for an individual or $6,150 for a family (2010 and 2011, adjusted annually). Individuals age 55 or older can make additional "catch-up" annual contributions of $1,000. Individuals are responsible for ensuring that their annual HSA contributions do not exceed the maximum allowed by law. 
Distributions  
Individuals can withdraw HSA funds tax-free to pay qualified medical expenses, as defined by the IRS. These include but are not limited to doctor's office visits, hospital care, dental care, vision care, prescription drugs, and over-the-counter medications, as well as deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance. Under healthcare reform, over-thecounter medications will not qualify unless prescribed by a doctor (effective January 1, 2011). 
In general individuals cannot use HSA funds tax-free to pay health insurance premiums. But they may do so for the following:  COBRA continuation coverage; 
 tax-qualified long-term care insurance (LTCI);  
 Medicare premiums (Parts A, B, D, and Medicare Advantage), but not Medicare supplement (Medigap) policies (only persons 65 or older); and 
 health coverage while receiving unemployment compensation. 
Unlike with an FSA or HRA, an individual may withdraw money from an HSA for items other than qualified medical expenses or allowed premiums. However, such withdrawals are subject to federal income tax plus an excise tax (10 percent in 2010, under healthcare reform increasing to 20 percent in 2011). If the individual is 65 or older or if the withdrawal is made after the death or disability of the individual, regular income tax applies but not the excise tax. 
Healthcare Reform 
The healthcare reform legislation of 2010 will likely have only a modest impact on CDHPs and their associated healthcare accounts (FSAs, HRAs, and HSAs). There were proposals to eliminate some of these options (in particular FSAs and HRAs), but they did not survive the legislative process. 
We have already mentioned two changes affecting healthcare accounts: the increase from 10 to 20 percent in the excise tax on HSA withdrawals for purposes other than qualified medical expenses, and the elimination from qualified medical expenses of overthe-counter medications not prescribed by a doctor. Two other provisions will affect these accounts:  
• Small employers will be prohibited (effective 2014) from offering health plans with deductibles greater than $2,000 (individual) or $4,000 (family) unless the employer offers a healthcare FSA that reimburses the difference between this limit and the deductible. 
• There will be an annual limit on employee contributions to a healthcare FSA (effective 2013) of $2,500 (adjusted annually). This could encourage people to switch to HSAs, which have higher limits.  
The impact on CDHPs of some elements of healthcare reform will not be clear until the federal regulations implementing the legislation are developed. The following provisions may or may not negatively affect HDHPs depending on how the regulations are written.  
• Minimum actuarial value. All health insurance plans will be required to be designed to pay, on average, at least 60 percent of the expected cost of services covered by the plan. If the regulations are written to consider only benefits paid, some HDHPs might not meet this standard, whereas if funds deposited into HSAs are taken into account, most likely will.  
• Medical loss ratio. Insurers will be required to pay at least 80 percent of their premium revenues on medical claims. This could be challenging for HDHPs because they must incur the administrative cost of processing claims incurred before the deductible is met, even though such claims are not paid and do not count toward the medical loss ratio. 
• Preventive care. All health insurance plans will be required to provide first-dollar coverage (no cost-sharing) of preventive care services. Most qualified HDHPs already provide this, but the healthcare reform regulations defining “preventive care” will need to be consistent with the IRS definition for HSA purposes or plans may no longer meet the HSA requirements. 
On the other hand, some healthcare reform provisions could encourage CDHP enrollment. There will be an excise tax on high-value employer-sponsored health coverage, and in many cases the best way to avoid this tax may be a CDHP. Subsidies will be provided to help people with income below a certain level pay health insurance premiums, and many people may find that a CDHP is the best way to make the most of these subsidies.  
Conclusion 
Although they have existed in various forms for over 30 years, consumer-directed health plans have entered the spotlight in recent years in response to the demand for lowercost health coverage options that offer greater choice and control. CDHPs meet this need by combining a core contribution by employers with increased choice and financial responsibility for employees, along with increased accountability for health plans and providers.  
 
 
Notes 
                                                 
1
 Bureau of Labor Statistics. Table 24: “Pretax benefits: Access, private industry workers,” 
National Compensation Survey, March 2007. Mercer Human Resources Consulting, National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans 2008. Both cited in “Health Care Flexible Spending Accounts” by Janemarie Mulvey, Congressional Research Service, May 11, 2010.  2  The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust, Employer Health 
Benefits 2009 Annual Survey, 2009. Cited in “Tax-Advantaged Accounts for Health Care Expenses: Side-by-Side Comparison” by Carol Rapaport, Congressional Research Service, June 18, 2010. 

11 Provider Organizations 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• discuss the types and levels of provider integration,  describe and distinguish between the main physician-only integration models,  describe and distinguish between the main physician-hospital integration models,   discuss the assumption of insurance risk by provider organizations, and 
• describe accountable care organizations (ACOs) and patient-centered medical homes (PCMHs). 
This course is about health plans, but in this module we look at another element of the healthcare environment—healthcare providers integrated into organizations. We explain what provider integration is and what its advantages are, survey the types and levels of provider integration, and describe the most important provider organization models. Provider Integration 
Different healthcare provider organizations are characterized by different types and levels of provider integration. There are two main types provider integration: 
• Structural integration brings separate providers under common ownership or control.  
• Operational integration consolidates into a single operation functions that were previously carried out independently by different providers. 
Structural Integration 
Structural integration may be complete or partial. Complete structural integration includes mergers and acquisitions.  
• A merger occurs when two or more separate providers are legally joined. One provider may absorb the others entirely, or, in a consolidation, the providers may combine to form a new organization, with all the original companies being dissolved. 
• In an acquisition one organization buys another organization. An organization that owns other organizations is known as the parent company, and the owned organizations are called subsidiaries. 
One type of partial structural integration is the joint venture. In a joint venture two or more separate organizations combine resources to achieve a certain objective. The participating companies share ownership of the venture and responsibility for its operations. Although there is generally a single source of control over the joint venture, the venture itself is not a separate legal entity. Usually, the organizations maintain their separate ownership as well as separate control over their operations outside of the joint venture. 
Some provider organizations have minimal structural integration. The providers who are members of these organization enter into contracts in which they agree to cooperate and act as one body in certain business transactions. But each provider maintains completely separate ownership and may also maintain complete control over its operations in all other business transactions. 
Operational Integration 
Operational integration can take the form of business integration or clinical integration. 
• Business integration combines business (nonclinical) functions performed independently into a single operation. For example, a group of doctors might form an organization to carry out billing, collections, and contracting with health plans for all of them. 
• Clinical integration involves making healthcare services available to patients from the same organization or entity.  
Clinical integration has certain advantages: Administrative processes are often more streamlined than when a number of providers furnish services independently. And patient information is often consolidated into one medical record in one location, which can improve the quality of care. 
Example: Joanne receives her healthcare from the Superior Healthcare System, an integrated delivery system (discussed below). Joanne visits her primary care physician, who sends her for blood tests and x-rays and refers her to a specialist. Eventually, she goes into the hospital and undergoes surgery, and afterwards she is visited by a home healthcare nurse. All the services that Joanne receives are furnished by a single provider organization, Superior, and all the Superior healthcare professionals who treat her work with the same medical record. In this way, each provider who encounters her has access to the same accurate and complete information regarding her health status and history, helping to ensure that she receives consistent and high-quality care. In addition, she encounters a minimum of administrative requirements when receiving her various healthcare services. 
The Level of Integration—A Continuum 
The amount of operational integration in each provider organization falls somewhere on a continuum stretching from minimally integrated to fully integrated. The figure below shows the continuum of operational integration and where the different models of provider organizations we will study in this module usually fall in this continuum. 
Provider Organizations—The Continuum of Operational Integration 
Less Integrated 	 	 	 	 	 	 	        More Integrated 
Physician-Only Models 
IPA 	 	GPWW and MSO 	PPM company 	consolidated medical group 
Physician-Hospital Models 
PHO  	 	 	 	 	 	 	IDS and medical foundation 
On the left side of the continuum are the provider organizations with the lowest level of integration. In these models the provider members create an organization to perform a single business function, and apart from this function the providers maintain fully independent operations. For example, providers often form legal entities whose sole purpose is to negotiate with health plans on behalf of the member providers. Many independent practice associations (IPAs) and physician-hospital organizations (PHOs) have this low level of integration. 
On the right side are highly integrated provider organizations, including the consolidated medical group, the integrated delivery system (IDS), and the medical foundation. As an example, an IDS has a high level of both business and clinical integration and offers consumers the full range of healthcare services. 
In the middle of the integration continuum are organizations that handle a number of services for providers (usually business services) but leave other functions in the providers’ hands. These organizations include group practices without walls (GPWWs), management services organizations (MSOs), and physician practice management (PPM) companies. They may negotiate contracts with health plans on behalf of providers and may integrate administrative support services include billing, collections, claims processing, staffing, appointment scheduling, medical record keeping, and equipment purchase and maintenance. They may also integrate practice management services such as financial services, legal services, information management, marketing, and strategic planning. 
The Advantages of Integration 
Integration can be advantageous for providers as well as for consumers, health plans, and purchasers. For providers the main advantages are as follows: 
• Efficiency. Greater operating efficiency and effectiveness can be realized. If instead of duplicating tasks performed by other providers, providers share functions, the cost to each provider is often less. 
• Expertise. An organization performing business functions for several providers may possess or develop considerable expertise in those functions. As a result, providers can benefit from improvement in marketing, strategic planning, information systems, and other business services.  
• Negotiating strength. Integration can improve providers’ negotiating position in relation to health plans. A group of providers can offer a more extensive array of services to a health plan than can a single provider, and consequently the health plan may be willing and able to offer more favorable contract terms to the provider group than to individual providers.  
The main disadvantage to providers of integration is a loss of autonomy and control over their own work environment. Some providers prefer to work as independent owners of small businesses rather than as members of a larger group or employees of an organization. 
For health plans, purchasers, and consumers, provider integration has the potential for greater provider operating efficiency and lower costs. Integration can also make it easier for consumers to obtain healthcare by enabling them to access a wide array of services from one organization. 
Provider Integration Models 
Provider integration takes many forms, and in the following sections we will look at the most common models of provider organizations. Although we describe the characteristics of each model, it should be kept in mind that, as with the models of HMOs and other health plans, features are always in flux and distinctions between models may not be clear-cut. Some organizations you encounter may differ from our descriptions.  
Some models integrate physicians only, others integrate physicians with one or more hospitals. Some organizations (both physician-only or physician-hospital), in addition to providing healthcare services, assume the insurance risk related to those services. We will describe first physician-only models, then physician-hospital models, then organizations that assume insurance risk. 
Physician-Only Models 
There are several organizational models that integrate, to some extent, the practices of a number of physicians. Most of them contract with health plans (and sometimes directly with purchasers) on behalf of their member physicians, and many also handle other services for providers. 
Independent Practice Association (IPA) 
One minimally integrated physician-only organization is the independent practice association (IPA). An IPA is made up of individual physicians or physicians in small group practices. It generally performs only one service for its member physicians— contracting with health plans on their behalf. We discussed IPAs earlier in relation to IPA model HMOs.  
In terms of contractual relationships there are two types of IPAs: 
• In the messenger model the IPA does not enter into a contract with a health plan. Its role is only to negotiate on behalf of its member physicians the terms of contracts between those physicians and health plans. The physicians themselves enter into contracts directly with the health plans, based on the terms negotiated by the IPA. The messenger model is most often used with fee-for-service or discounted fee-for-service compensation arrangements. 
• More commonly, the physicians each contract with the IPA, and the IPA enters into a contract with the health plan. In this model, the method by which the IPA is compensated by the health plan may or may not be same as the method by which the IPA compensates its member physicians. For example, an HMO might compensate an IPA by capitation, and the IPA might compensate its doctors by capitation or by some other method, such as fee-for-service or discounted feefor-service. 
An IPA (or other organization) that accepts capitation from a health plan may limit its risk by buying stop-loss insurance. In this arrangement, if the IPA spends more than a certain amount per year on an individual, the insurer issuing the stop-loss insurance reimburses the IPA for expenditures in excess of that amount. For example, an IPA might purchase stop-loss insurance to cover all spending on any individual in excess of $50,000 in a year. 
Group Practice Without Walls (GPWW) 
A model that generally has a greater degree of integration than an IPA is a group practice without walls (GPWW), also called a clinic without walls. This is a legal entity that combines multiple independent physician practices under one umbrella organization and performs certain business operations for the member practices or arranges for these operations to be performed. A GPWW may maintain its own facility for business operations, or it may hire another company to provide this function. Physician income is usually based on the performance of both the individual physician and the group. 
A GPWW may be owned by its member physicians, by a hospital, or by a physician practice management company (see below). When the member physicians own the GPWW, how does it differ from an IPA? A GPWW performs business operations for physician members, while IPA members generally conduct their own business operations. (The IPA only negotiates contracts.) On the other hand, a GPWW differs from a consolidated medical group (below) in that the GPWW physicians maintain their practices independently at multiple locations.  Management Services Organization (MSO) 
Another physician-only model in the middle of the integration continuum is the management services organization (MSO). An MSO, owned by a hospital or a group of investors, provides management and administrative support services to individual physicians or small group practices. One purpose of MSOs is to relieve physicians of nonmedical business functions so that they can concentrate on the clinical aspects of their practices. Because MSOs integrate business functions that were previously separate, they can generally achieve economies of scale, and these cost savings may be passed on to physicians, health plans, and purchasers.  
In some cases MSOs simply provide business services to physicians for a fee. In other cases MSOs purchase the tangible assets (buildings, equipment, and supplies) of physicians and lease them back to them. In these situations, the physicians continue to own their own medical records and health plan contracts and continue to practice in their own offices. This arrangement relieves physicians of yet another nonmedical aspect of running a practice.  
One type of MSO is the physician practice management (PPM) company. This is an organization, owned by a group of investors, that purchases physician practices. Note that PPM companies generally purchase the entire practice, not just the tangible assets as discussed above. The PPM company usually gives a physician a long-term contract to continue working in his practice, and sometimes it gives him an ownership interest in the company. But the PPM company manages the practice, particularly the non-medical aspects. Most PPM companies focus on developing a network of either primary care physicians or physicians in a certain specialty, such as cardiology or oncology. 
Consolidated Medical Group 
Full structural and operational integration of physician practices is embodied by the consolidated medical group, also referred to as the medical group practice or clinic model. This is a large single medical practice that operates in one or a few facilities rather than in many independent offices. The group may be formed from previously independent practices. The group is often owned by a parent company or a hospital, and it may be a single-specialty or multi-specialty practice.  
A consolidated medical group can offer several advantages to health plans, including: 
 lower costs because of economies of scale resulting from the group’s integrated and centralized operations,  access to a sizeable and stable group of physicians, and 
 greater ability to monitor and manage quality and utilization.  
Physician-Hospital Models 
In addition to organizations that integrate physician practices, there are also those that integrate, to a lesser or greater extent, physicians with one or more hospitals. These organizations contract with health plans on behalf of the physicians and hospitals they represent and may contract directly with purchasers. Some serve other purposes in addition to contracting.  
Physician-Hospital Organization 
A physician-hospital organization (PHO) is a joint venture of a hospital and many or all of its admitting physicians. Its primary purposes are contracting with health plans and marketing. Apart from these functions, the physician practices and hospitals typically do not merge their operations. They continue to be independently owned and operated, but they serve patients under the terms of the contract between the PHO and the health plan. Participating physicians and hospitals share responsibility for managing and administering the PHO. 
Many PHOs are affiliations of one or more hospitals and an IPA or other association of physicians. A PHO is similar to an IPA, but it includes at least one hospital and usually a wider variety of providers. Sometimes a rural community contracts with a PHO and becomes a party to a health plan contract, resulting in an entity called a physician hospital community organization (PHCO). 
A PHO may be classified as one of two types: 
 Membership in an open PHO is available to all of a hospital’s eligible medical staff. Typically, open PHOs have more specialists than PCPs. Sometimes an IPA or a GPWW represents all or some of the physicians in an open PHO. 
 A closed PHO limits the number of specialists for each specialty. A variation of the closed PHO is the specialist PHO, which includes only providers of a certain specialty, such as psychiatrists or pediatricians. 
Common compensation arrangements for PCPs in a PHO are discounted fees and capitation. Specialists are typically paid on a discounted FFS basis. Some PHOs with  HMO contracts compensate hospitals through capitation, but many others use per diem payments. 
Because a PHO can offer a broad range of healthcare services under one umbrella, participating in a PHO gives physicians and hospitals greater leverage in negotiating contracts with health plans and employers. Also, joining a PHO enables hospitals to improve their relationships and enhance their collaboration with physicians and market their services more effectively. Other reasons hospitals and doctors form PHOs include sharing financial risk and enhancing the quality of care. 
Integrated Delivery System (IDS) 
An integrated delivery system (IDS) is a provider organization that is fully integrated operationally (both in terms of business and clinical) and provides a full range of healthcare services, including physician services, hospital services, and ancillary services. Because of this comprehensiveness, an IDS can be in a strong position to attract and negotiate with health plans or purchasers.  
Although an IDS is fully integrated operationally, it may or may not be highly integrated structurally.  
• Some IDSs are structured as contracts between providers that maintain ownership and substantial control over their own practices.  
• In other IDSs provider practices are owned and controlled by the IDS. This type, the employment model IDS, generally owns or is affiliated with a hospital, purchases or establishes physician practices, and retains the physicians as employees.  
• Some IDSs assume insurance risk (as discussed below). 
Medical Foundation 
In some states laws prohibit a corporation from owning a physician practice, making an employment model IDS impossible. In these states some hospitals and health plans have instead created medical foundations, not-for-profit entities that purchase and manage physician practices. However, to maintain its not-for-profit status, a medical foundation must meet certain requirements related to the benefit it provides to the community, and this may make it difficult for it to compete with other organizations that are not subject to this requirement.  
 
Provider Organizations That Assume Insurance Risk 
Some of the provider organizations described in this module (such as some IDSs, consolidated medical groups, IPAs, and PHOs) not only integrate provider functions but assume insurance risk. They are commonly referred to as at-risk organizations. An atrisk provider organization contracts directly with purchasers and health plans.  
For a health plan, contracting with an at-risk provider organization has the advantage of relieving the plan of all or part of the responsibility of developing a provider network. But certain issues may arise in relation to the division of responsibilities between the plan and the provider organization. 
• The provider organization may want to handle credentialing and claims payment because it does so for other payors (such as Medicare) and wants to spread the costs over a broader business base. But the health plan may also want to perform these functions so that it can make sure they are done correctly and in accordance with the contract. The health plan also needs claims data for quality and utilization management.  
• To control costs more effectively, the health plan may want fewer network providers than the provider organization.  
This division of functions may be governed by state regulations or influenced by the requirements of accreditation agencies. For example, in many states laws require HMOs to perform certain functions.  
To provide insurance an at-risk provider organization needs to develop, acquire, or otherwise gain access to expertise in many areas of insurance operations, including actuarial science, underwriting, claims, and quality and utilization management. The provider organization can perform these functions itself or contract with another entity such as an insurance company or HMO to provide them.  
Depending on the state in which it operates and exactly how it operates, an at-risk provider organization may have to obtain either an HMO or an insurance company license and comply with the laws and regulations that apply to such organizations. In some states an at-risk provider organization does not need an insurance license but is required to maintain substantial financial reserves. 
Emerging Models 
Accountable Care Organization (ACO) 
Accountable care organizations (ACOs) have been receiving considerable attention since the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) (healthcare reform), which seeks to promote them. An ACO is a group of healthcare providers who deliver comprehensive and coordinated care with an emphasis on screening, prevention, and ongoing management of chronic diseases, thereby improving the quality of care received by patients. For example, in an ACO a primary care physician and a specialist might work together to treat an adult with type II diabetes, monitoring her diet and medication to prevent hospitalization and the possible amputation of a limb. 
The ACA directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to create the Medicare Shared Savings Program, which encourages groups of providers to come together to form ACOs to manage and coordinate inpatient and outpatient care for Medicare fee-for-serve beneficiaries. ACOs that meet certain quality standards will be eligible to receive payments based on a share of the savings generated. 
The ACA sets forth only broad outlines of this program, specifying that an ACO must: 
• be willing to become accountable for the overall quality and cost of the care of the Medicare beneficiaries assigned to it;  agree to participate in the program for at least three years; 
• establish a structure that will allow the organization to receive and distribute payments for shared savings to participating providers;  have enough primary care providers to care for the beneficiaries assigned to it; 
• provide HHS with information on the provider network and other data for use in assigning beneficiaries, implementing quality, and other reporting requirements as well as determining shared savings payments; 
• have a leadership and management structure that includes clinical and administrative systems; 
• define processes to promote evidence-based medicine and patient engagement, report on quality and cost measures, and coordinate care (such as through the use of telehealth and other technologies); and   demonstrate to HHS that it meets criteria for patient centered care. 
Details on how ACOs are to be set up and the standards that will apply to them will be determined by HHS and issued in regulations. The Medicare Shared Savings Program is scheduled to be launched January 1, 2012. Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH) 

Federal legislation in recent years has authorized and funded medical home demonstration projects for Medicare fee-for-service patients with chronic conditions, and the ACA seeks to promote medical homes in various ways. A patient-centered medical home (PCMH) is a model of healthcare delivery in which each patient has a personal physician who is responsible for providing or coordinating care for her on a continuous basis. In an effort to achieve better health outcomes and more efficient use of resources, the PCMH model seeks to replace healthcare delivery in which a person receives various medical services from a succession of different providers in reaction to illnesses that arise with a strong, long-term physician-patient relationship and continuity and coordination of care.  
The main features of a patient-centered medical home include the following:1 
• The personal physician. Each patient in a PCMH has an ongoing relationship with a personal physician. The personal physician serves as the patient’s first contact point when she needs care, and he coordinates her care with specialists, other healthcare professionals, laboratories, and hospitals. He is responsible for providing or coordinating preventive care, the treatment of acute illnesses and chronic conditions, and (where appropriate) assistance with end-of-life issues. He is responsible for care across settings, including the doctor’s office, the hospital, and the patient’s home. He also plays an educational role, helping patients understand test results, procedures, and treatment options. 
• Physician-directed care. In a PCMH the personal physician leads a team of providers who collectively assume responsibility for ongoing care of the patient. For example, for a particular patient the personal doctor might coordinate the services of a specialist, a lab technician, and a dietician. 
• Whole person and patient-centered care. The strong and ongoing relationship between the patient and the personal physician allows an approach that includes the whole person and is patient-centered. Instead of medical conditions being treated in isolation, a patient’s total physical condition and health history are taken into account more fully, so that overlapping and negative interactions of treatments are avoided. Also, a personal doctor can be aware of both a patient’s mind and body; can consider her personal values, preferences, and quality of life in weighing clinical alternatives and priorities; and can educate her and her family about her medical options and how to stay healthy. 
• Coordination of care. The PCMH model coordinates healthcare not just within a medical practice, but across all components of the healthcare system including specialty care, hospitals, nursing homes, home health agencies, communitybased services, and even care provided by family and friends. PCMH coordination relies heavily on technology, including electronic medical records and databases and registries. 
• Quality and safety. The PCMH model seeks to provide optimal outcomes by delivering evidenced-based medicine and using clinical decision-making support tools to guide treatment. The PCMH design also avoids patient safety risks that can arise from the lack of communication and coordination of treatments that often occur in a fragmented healthcare delivery system. 
Page 
• Enhanced access to care. The PCMH model seeks to make access to care more available through expanded office hours and technology. Alternatives to face-to-face communications, such as email and telephone conversations, can play a role in non-emergency situations. 
In a PCMH model compensation is ideally based on a mix that includes fee-for-service payment for physician visits, additional compensation for care management, and incentive payments for achieving measurable quality goals. This approach recognizes the time and effort physicians spend guiding patients’ overall care and pays them for it, in contrast to pure capitation and pure fee-for-service. 
Note 
                                                 
1  This discussion draws in part on a publication of the Robert Graham Center, Center for Policy Studies in Family Medicine and Primary Care: The Patient-Centered Medical Home: History, Seven Core Features, and Transformational Change, November 2007, page 5. 
Page 
12 Health Plan Structure and Management 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 compare for-profit and not-for-profit health plans and stock and mutual insurance companies,  describe the role of a health plan’s board of directors,  identify a health plan’s key management positions and their functions, and  list some of the main committees that serve a health plan.  
This module gives the essential elements of the structure, governance, and management of a health plan. We learn about the main types of plans, the role of the board of directors, the main management positions and their responsibilities, and the main committees and the areas they address.  The Structure of a Health Plan 
The founders of a health plan decide the type of structure they want for the organization based on their objectives. Businesses may choose to organize in one of three basic ways—as a sole proprietorship, a partnership, or a corporation. Most health plans are corporations. A corporation is an organization that is recognized by a governmental authority as a legal entity separate from its owners. Corporations have two major characteristics that set them apart from sole proprietorships and partnerships. First, because corporations are considered to be distinct legal entities, a corporation can be a party in a legal action. Second, a corporation continues beyond the death of any or all of its owners. Furthermore, a corporation that is well managed can survive the personal misfortunes of any of its owners. This fact is reassuring to people who might invest in the corporation or buy its products.  
Holding Companies and Subsidiaries 
A parent company is one that owns another company. A subsidiary is a company that is owned by another company, its parent. A holding company is a company whose sole business is the ownership of other companies, which are its subsidiaries. In other words, a holding company is also a parent. For instance, a holding company might own both an insurance company (a subsidiary) and a PPO (another subsidiary). Two subsidiaries of the same company are known as sister corporations.  
Subsidiary companies are formed for specific purposes within the holding company framework. Originally, the holding company concept was used to acquire a group of companies in the same or related lines of business in order to maximize expertise and market presence in that field. Today the holding company arrangement is also used to control companies in widely differing industries, enabling the holding company to diversify its interests and protect itself from the risks involved in concentrating on just one kind of business.  

Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Health Plans  
A health plan may organize under a taxable not-for-profit form, a tax-exempt not-for- profit form, or a for-profit form. The form chosen will have many implications for the plan and its organizers, including effects on taxation, regulation, and the raising of capital. Traditionally, HMOs and Blue Cross and Blue Shield (BCBS) health plans operated as not-for-profit entities, although many have converted to for-profit. The IRS classifies some not-for-profit health plans as tax-exempt but not not-for-profit BCBS plans.  
Tax-exempt status is obviously is a significant advantage. Not-for-profit health plans that have it are not required to pay federal and state income tax and may not pay property taxes. In many cases, however, even tax-exempt plans must pay state premium taxes. 
On the other hand, tax-exempt plans must adhere to numerous restrictive conditions to qualify for the exemption. Essentially, they must operate for non-profit purposes only, with only incidental benefits going to private individuals involved in the plan, and they may not engaging in lobbying or political activities. They must be extremely careful when engaging in business activities with taxable entities—if a taxable entity benefits from a plan’s tax-exempt status in some way, the plan could lose its exemption. The IRS regularly reviews tax-exempt plans to confirm that they continue to meet the requirements. 
Another disadvantage of not-for-profit plans, whether taxable or tax-exempt, is having limited means of raising capital for expansion or major long-term projects, such as developing information systems and medical management infrastructure. Not-for-profit plans must typically rely on income from operations for the large cash outlays needed for such purposes. It is for this reason that the majority of new health plans are organized as for-profit entities, and many existing non-profits, including BCBS plans, have converted to for-profit status or created for-profit subsidiaries.  
Stock and Mutual Companies 
Most large companies, in insurance and other industries, are stock companies. In a stock company, people may purchase shares of the company’s stock. These are literally “shares” of ownership of the company—the stockholders of the company are each part-owners of the company. The stockholders control the company through stockholder voting and share the company’s profits, which they receive in the form of periodic payments called dividends.  
A mutual company is different—it has no stockholders. The ownership and control of a mutual insurance company is held by its policyholders, who elect its board of directors. 
Mutual insurers do not exist for the purpose of making a profit and paying dividends (although if a mutual insurer builds up a large surplus, it may return money to its policyholders as dividends). 
Most health insurance companies are stock companies, although mutual companies account for a substantial share of business, as many large companies are mutual. A company may convert from mutual to stock in a process called demutualization. The primary reason for demutualization is that a stock company can more easily raise capital because it can issue additional stock to the public. For example, a stock company health plan wishing to acquire a physician practice can sell new shares of stock to fund the acquisition. Conversion from stock to mutual (mutualization) is also possible; it was once common but no longer is. 
Components of a Health Plan Organization 
Owners 
Theoretically, at the top of a health plan’s organization chart are its owners—the stockholders of a stock company or the policyholders of a mutual company. The owners are the ultimate source of authority. However, they do not usually direct the actual operations of the company; instead they elect a board of directors to whom they delegate their authority. 
Board of Directors 
The board of directors is the primary governing body of a health plan. All for-profit and most not-for-profit plans have a board of directors. The board’s major responsibility is to ensure the continued existence of the organization. To this end, the board periodically reviews the activities and finances of the company and sets company policies. The board appoints the chief executive officer (CEO) and may also appoint other top executives (or the CEO may appoint them), and it holds these executives responsible for the company’s operations. In most plans meetings of the board of directors are held either monthly or quarterly, and special meetings may be called when necessary. 
A minimum number of directors is usually specified by the charter of the corporation and sometimes by state insurance regulations. The CEO and a few other top executives may or may not be members of the board. Board members who hold positions in the company are known as inside directors, and those who do not are outside directors. Outside directors are usually business people, professionals in academia and health services, and community leaders. For a not-for-profit plan to qualify for tax exemption, no more than a certain percentage (usually 20 percent) of board members can be inside directors, and the rest must be representatives of the community. To protect the interests of consumers, some states permit only a minority of board members to be from the healthcare industry.  
The following responsibilities are typically part of a board of directors’ overall governance and oversight function: 
 	the authorization of major financial transactions, including mergers and acquisitions and large capital expenditures; 
 the monitoring of financial performance, including earnings and losses resulting from plan operations as well as investment strategy and performance; 
 the appointment and evaluation of the CEO (and sometimes also some senior executives);   participation in corporate strategic planning;  the evaluation and approval of operational policies and procedures; and  oversight of the quality management (QM) program, including review of the QM plan and feedback to the medical director and the QM committee.  
In some health plans the board also has the responsibility to hear final appeals of member complaints. 
In addition, the board of directors has specific legal duties and obligations as defined by state corporate codes, the organization’s articles of incorporation, and plan bylaws. For example, as fiduciaries (individuals or entities that hold a position of special trust and confidence), board members have a duty to act in the best interests of the organization and not in their own personal business interests. The board also has a duty to supervise the performance of its officers and outside advisors. If the board does not fulfill its responsibilities, it may be held liable for its actions. The board may also be held liable for the plan’s actions if those actions harm another party. 
Key Management Positions 
Responsibility for a health plan’s day-to-day operations typically rests with key senior managers who report directly to the CEO. The number, roles, titles, and reporting responsibilities of these managers vary according to the type of plan, its size and complexity, its legal organization, and its product offerings. Different management components can be structured in any number of ways. However, there are some management positions that are common to all corporations or to all health plans, and we will survey these here. 
The managers listed below have general corporate responsibilities. They are found in all industries, and their duties are not specific to healthcare. 
 	The chief executive officer (CEO) is responsible for the organization’s overall operation, general administration, and public affairs. All other key managers report to the CEO, who reports directly to the board of directors. 
 The chief financial officer (CFO) or finance director is responsible for accounting activities such as budget planning, accounting, and internal audits, and financial operations such as membership billing and underwriting. 
 The chief operations officer (COO) or director of operations oversees programs and services that support the organization as a whole, including enrollment, claims, member services, office management, human resources, and similar functions. 
 The chief marketing officer (CMO) or marketing director oversees the organization’s marketing and sales activities, including advertising, client relations, and enrollment and sales forecasting. 
 The chief information officer (CIO) is responsible for the plan’s computer hardware and software systems, its telephone and electronic communication systems, and its electronic commerce (e-commerce) capabilities. These systems are vital to a plan’s medical management activities as well as its nonclinical operations. The importance of this function is likely to grow as information 
systems become more and more sophisticated and demands from purchasers, plan members, and regulatory and accrediting agencies increase. 
Health plan management also includes positions that are unique to healthcare organizations, including the medical director, the network management director, and the corporate compliance director. 
Medical Director 
Most health plans have a medical director or chief medical officer (CMO), a physician executive who is responsible for the quality and cost-effectiveness of the medical care delivered by the plan’s providers. In some plans the medical director participates in dayto-day operations such as non-routine authorization decisions, claim reviews, utilization review, and provider education, while in others she develops medical management policies and procedures but is not involved in operations.  
Large or complex plans often divide operational responsibility for medical management among additional associate medical directors. For example, a plan may assign responsibility for functions such as utilization review or quality management to associate medical directors, or it may divide its service area into regions, each overseen by an associate director.  
Network Management Director.  
A plan’s medical director may also be responsible for network management, but in large plans this function is often separate. In this case a network management director is responsible for developing and managing the plan’s provider networks, and she has authority over such activities as recruiting, credentialing, contracting, service, and performance management for providers. 
Corporate Compliance Director  
To ensure that they are adhering to the many state and federal laws and regulations that apply to them, many health plans have instituted formal compliance programs headed by a corporate compliance director—an executive-level manager dedicated to overseeing compliance activities. And in most cases, this is a regulatory requirement— for instance under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and for plans the participate in the Medicare Advantage program. In addition, under HIPAA’s Privacy and Security Rules, health plans must designate an official or staff with responsibility for the organization's privacy and security policies. 
The corporate compliance director is responsible for overseeing efforts to detect and prevent conduct by the health plan and its agents that violates legal requirements. These efforts include: 
 developing and implementing written standards and procedures to reduce criminal misconduct by the health plan’s employees and agents;   assigning upper-level personnel to oversee compliance;  
 avoiding the delegation of authority to persons known to or inclined to engage in illegal activities;   effectively communicating corporate standards to all employees and agents;  
 implementing reasonable measures to achieve compliance, including auditing and reporting systems;  
 consistently enforcing corporate standards through appropriate disciplinary mechanisms;  
 taking all reasonable steps to respond appropriately to existing misconduct and prevent future misconduct; and  
 establishing and enforcing rules regarding confidentiality and security of member information.  
The nature of a health plan’s compliance program and the scope of the director’s responsibilities depend on the size and financial condition of the organization, the vulnerability of the organization to misconduct, and the organization’s history of involvement in fraud or misconduct. 
Committees 
Committees are a means of incorporating nonmanagement input into a health plan’s policies and procedures. Standing committees are permanent and serve as long-term advisory bodies on ongoing issues such as financial management, compliance, quality management, utilization management, strategic planning, and compensation. Ad hoc committees (or special committees) are convened to address specific management concerns and typically disbanded once the issue has been resolved. For example, a special litigation committee may be temporarily established to oversee a legal challenge regarding breach of fiduciary duty. 
General Corporate Committees 
Some committees are common to all corporations (not healthcare-specific): 
• The executive committee handles issues related to overall organizational policy, including lines of business and employment policies. 
• The strategic planning committee directs the company’s strategic direction and goals. 
• The compensation committee addresses issues related to compensation of the CEO and the plan’s general compensation and employee benefit policies. 
• The finance committee sets the organization’s broad investment policies and reviews and approves financial and accounting activities. 
• The nominating committee makes nominations for the company’s officers as required in the organization’s bylaws. 
Health Plan Committees 
Other committees are unique to healthcare organizations: 
• The Quality Management (QM) Committee oversees the plan’s quality assessment and improvement activities in both clinical and nonclinical areas. This committee identifies the appropriate issues for monitoring, evaluates the results of quality studies to identify and prioritize opportunities for performance improvement, develops quality improvement action plans and oversees their implementation, monitors and evaluates the overall effectiveness of the organization’s quality improvement efforts, and oversees the organization’s accreditation efforts. The QM committee also reviews and updates the organization’s QM plan for approval by the board of directors and recommends policy decisions to the board. Some plans have a Quality Council, which focuses on quality improvement efforts and includes both plan managers and network providers. This is required for NCQA accreditation (discussed in a later module). A plan’s Executive Quality Improvement Committee oversees the quality management committee, accreditation efforts, and other quality functions.  
• The Peer Review Committee reviews cases in which the quality of the healthcare delivered was questionable or problematic. This committee also formulates, approves, and monitors corrective action plans as needed. In some plans, this function is handled by the QM committee. 
• The Utilization Management (UM) Committee reviews and updates the plan’s UM program and establishes utilization review (UR) protocols. The UM committee may also be responsible for reviewing referral and utilization patterns and utilization decisions based on medical appropriateness. 
• The Appeals Review Committee reviews appeals related to medical management or coverage determinations. The panel consists of various health plan personnel and healthcare professionals who specialize in the medical conditions under review. Most states require health plans to have an Appeals Review Committee. 
• The Medical Advisory Committee evaluates proposed policies and action plans related to clinical practice management, including changes in provider contracts and compensation and authorization procedures. This committee also reviews data regarding new medical technology and examines proposed medical policies. 
• The Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee develops, updates, and administers the plan’s formulary and regularly reviews clinical trial reports, drug utilization reports, current and proposed therapeutic guidelines, and economic data on drugs. 
• The Credentialing Committee establishes and updates credentialing processes and criteria and reviews provider credentials during the credentialing and recredentialing processes. In some plans the QM committee handles credentialing. 
• The Corporate Compliance Committee monitors and guides all compliance  activities, including the appointment of the corporate compliance director, approval of compliance program policies and procedures, review of the organization’s annual compliance plan, evaluation of internal and external audits to identify potential risks, and implementation of corrective and preventive actions. 
• The Ethics Committee educates employees and contracted providers about ethical professional and business conduct, provides guidance in difficult cases, and may discipline employees for unethical actions. 
In different health plans, some of the above committees may be combined in different ways. Some of these committees include only plan employees, such as program directors and managers, but many have external members, such as network physicians.  

13 Network Structure and Management 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• identify the main considerations in a market analysis for a health plan network; 
• list the factors in deciding the number, types, and locations of providers in a network;  describe the main steps of the provider recruitment and selection process;  describe provider credentialing; and   identify the most important provisions of the provider contract. 
As you have previously learned, health plans arrange for the delivery of high-quality, cost-effective healthcare services to plan members. This is accomplished by the development and management of the plan’s provider network. Since the plan’s members interact with the organization primarily through its providers, the steps the plan takes to design, assemble, monitor, and maintain its network are critical to the success of the plan. 
In this module we begin our discussion of network management by describing factors that influence network design. Next we address some standard considerations in network structure, such as size and composition. We then discuss some of the issues health plans address when selecting, credentialing, negotiating with, and contracting with providers. We finish the module with an overview of the activities that are necessary to maintain the network and cultivate provider satisfaction. 
Market Analysis 
To establish a provider network, a health plan must understand the characteristics of its proposed service area, the needs of its proposed members, and its proposed products and focus. A market analysis is the tool used by plans to gather and analyze information on characteristics of the market, providers, competitors, employers, service area, general population, and the health plan itself. Market analysis also includes an analysis of current economic conditions. 
The Market  
One purpose of analyzing the market is to understand the level of health plan activity in a market—referred to as market maturity. The level of maturity in the market often indicates how knowledgeable providers and consumers are about health plans, how receptive providers and consumers are likely to be to health plans, and how active competition is among health plans in the service area. Markets at different levels of maturity require different network management approaches and strategies. For example, in a market with little health plan activity, consumers and purchasers are likely to be 
more receptive to loosely managed plans (such as PPOs) than to tightly managed plans (HMOs). 
The Provider Community 
The purpose of analyzing the provider community is to understand the types, numbers, and locations of healthcare providers in the proposed service area, as well as utilization patterns and healthcare costs. Providers include physicians, hospitals (the services they provide and the number of beds), and other practitioners and facilities. Analysis of the provider community also includes understanding the locations of the providers, including distances between provider locations and members’ homes and workplaces as well as any geographic barriers that may affect access. 
It is critical for the health plan to also understand existing referral patterns and established provider relationships in the service area, as well as hospital admitting/procedural privileges. Many physicians have established relationships with particular healthcare professionals in their community. In some communities groups of physicians may be affiliated with one entity, such as a hospital, a physician group or organization, or a physician/hospital-type organization. Understanding the existing referral patterns and the relationships of the providers in the proposed service area allows the plan to utilize network approaches and techniques reflective of these relationships. For example, if many of the physicians in the service area are affiliated with a single entity, the plan will most likely need to contract with that entity, while if most physicians are not affiliated with a single entity, the plan has more contracting options. 
The Competition 
Analysis of the competition includes understanding and assessing other health plans in the market. This assessment should include the following types of information for each competitor plan in the proposed service area:  
• competitor product types and premiums;  
• competitor network characteristics, including provider numbers, types, and locations and physician-to-member ratios;   cost-containment strategies used by competitors; and   provider satisfaction with competitors. 
Employers 
Analysis of the employers in the area includes understanding the size of employers. Large employers (more than 1,000 employees) tend to adopt health plans more quickly and are more likely to offer a choice of health plans than small companies. Small companies (less than 100 employees) may have less experience with health plans and lack the financial and administrative resources necessary to offer multiple health plan options. 
The Service Area 
Analysis of the proposed service area includes understanding whether it is primarily rural, suburban, or urban.  
• Rural communities typically have limited numbers and types of providers and facilities, including few hospitals. This makes it difficult for health plans to build a comprehensive network that satisfies member demand for a complete range of healthcare services. Also, in rural areas with few providers the health plan may have little or no choice about which facilities to include in its network. 
• Urban areas (population greater than 500,000) have larger numbers of physicians and facilities. The characteristics of urban areas offer health plans more flexibility in provider contracting. However, with more providers there is also increased pressure on the plan to offer larger networks. This in turn can complicate the plan’s management of costs, quality, and satisfaction levels. 
The Population 
Analysis of the population includes understanding key demographic characteristics. Characteristics of the population in the proposed market often influence the mix of providers and facilities included in the network. Some important population characteristics are ages, income levels, ethnicities, and religions. For example, health plan networks that serve the elderly (Medicare) often need to include post-acute care facilities (rehabilitation centers and skilled nursing facilities) in their networks. Plans that serve populations with large ethnic, racial, or religious groups should have networks that accommodate diverse language, cultural, and medical needs. 
The Health Plan  
The characteristics of the health plan affect the requirements for its network. Some of the characteristics of a plan that affect network requirements are:  
 products offered by the health plan (number and types),  geographic scope and market focus,  particular population, and  plan type. 
Health plans that offer more than one type of plan may choose to develop separate networks for each plan type. Another option is to coordinate provider networks through a system of interrelated networks, sometimes referred to as nested, customized, or subnetworks. Typically plans that offer only one type of health plan establish a single network designed around a unique set of goals and strategies. 
Economic Conditions 
Network design and management can be influenced by the level of growth or decline in an economy. A growing economy typically leads to increases in employment, population growth, and eventually growth in the medical community such as more hospitals, physicians, and other providers. On the other hand, a declining economy would likely have the opposite effect.  
Regulatory Requirements and Accreditation Guidelines 
In addition to understanding the characteristics of the proposed market, a health plan must understand and comply with the wide range of federal and state laws and regulations. And if the plan is or plans to be accredited, it must meet the standards set by accrediting agencies that are applicable to its network. 
Laws and Regulations 
Laws and regulations affecting health plans will be discussed in more detail in a later module, but at this point it is important to understand that some are applicable to a plan’s provider network, including those that address issues such as network adequacy, patient access to healthcare services, quality of care, mandated benefits, and providers’ right to contract. In this section we will summarize some of these laws. 
The HMO Act of 1973 requires federally qualified HMOs to provide: 
• geographic accessibility to primary care and most specialty providers with “reasonable promptness” and “within generally accepted norms for meeting projected enrollment needs,” 
• access to medically necessary emergency services 24 hours a day, seven days a week; and  a detailed description of service areas and provider locations. 
The Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) program requires health plans serving federal employees and their dependents to provide: 
immediate access to emergency services, urgent appointments within 24 hours, routine appointments within one month, and average office waiting times of no more than 30 minutes. 
The NAIC Managed Care Plan Network Adequacy Model Act, adopted in 1996, offers guidelines for states to use in measuring network adequacy. Network adequacy is the extent to which a network offers the appropriate types and numbers of providers in the appropriate geographic distribution according to the needs of the plan’s members. The Model Act includes standards for: 
provider-enrollee ratios, geographic accessibility, appointment waiting times, hours of operation, and 

volume of technical and specialty services available in the service area. 
Under the Model Act health plans are required to file an access plan showing how specific standards will be met.  
State any willing provider laws require health plans to allow any provider who is willing to accept the terms and conditions of the plan’s provider contract to participate in the plan’s network. A plan’s ability to include economic criteria (such as average cost per case or per member) as a term or condition of the contract depends on particular state laws. In some cases any willing provider laws apply to PPOs but not HMOs and similar plans. 
State mandated benefit laws typically require health plans to: 
• include in the plan’s benefit design specific benefits (such as chiropractics, hospice, home healthcare, and hospitalization for maternity care of a specified length); 
• include in the network specified providers or provider classes (such as behavioral healthcare professionals); and 
• grant direct access without referral by the primary care physician to specified provider classes (such as dermatologists, obstetricians/gynecologists, and pediatricians). 
As of 2014, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) of 2010 (commonly known as healthcare reform) will require most health plans to cover a comprehensive set of healthcare services, including preventive and wellness care, prescription drugs, mental healthcare, emergency care and ambulance services, and others, as stipulated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS). The Secretary will also have the responsibility of developing regulations to ensure a sufficient choice of providers by plan members as well as network adequacy and access.  
Guidelines of Accrediting Agencies 
Standards established by independent accrediting organizations also influence network design and management. The National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) and URAC are two of the best known accrediting agencies. You will learn more about health plan accreditation in a later module. 
Network Structure, Composition, and Size 
Structure 
Health plans typically structure their networks in one of two ways, either as a closed panel or an open panel.  
 In a closed panel plan, providers see only health plan members and generally operate out of health plan facilities and offices. Providers are either employed directly by the plan (staff model) or belong to a group of providers that hold contracts with the health plan (group model). 
In an open panel plan, independent physicians or providers who meet the health plan’s standards of care may be eligible to contract with the plan. Providers see both plan members and nonmembers and typically serve members out of their own facilities and offices. 
Whether a plan structures its network as a closed or open panel network depends on the structure and characteristics of the health plan.  
Composition 
As we learned previously, a health plan ensures that its members have convenient access to healthcare services. To provide good access, health plans must see that their network includes;   the appropriate types of providers,  the appropriate number of providers, and  providers in the appropriate locations. 
Regulations and standards require that networks be adequate. Guidelines have been established and are used to develop and maintain networks that are adequate in structure, composition, and size to meet the needs of plan members. The composition of a plan’s network is important to the health plan for many reasons, including marketing and product differentiation, member satisfaction and retention, and compliance with laws and standards specific to network adequacy.  
Types of Providers 
A health plan’s provider network typically includes a mix of the following types of providers: 
• Primary care providers (PCPs). In most cases primary care providers are general practitioners, family practitioners, internists, or pediatricians. Some plans classify obstetricians/gynecologists (OB/GYNs) as primary care providers, while others consider them specialists. Some plans also include nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) in their primary care panels, but NPs and PAs typically work under the supervision of a physician, and their ability to provide services independently may be limited by state law. 
• Specialists. A specialist is a healthcare professional whose practice is limited to a certain branch of medicine, based on specific services or procedures (such as anesthesia), specific body systems (neurology), certain types of diseases (oncology), or an age group (pediatrics or gerontology). Ideally, all specialty categories will be represented in a provider network. 
• Hospitalists. A hospitalist is a physician who exclusively manages inpatient hospital care. Hospitalists may be employed by a hospital or be in a medical group. Hospitalists allow other physicians to focus on the outpatient care of their patients. 
Healthcare facilities. Health plans contract with a variety of facilities including hospitals, ambulatory surgery facilities, ambulatory diagnostic and treatment centers, retail health clinics, sub-acute care facilities, and skilled nursing facilities. 
• Ancillary service providers. Ancillary services is an umbrella term for a variety of healthcare services that are an adjunct to primary, specialty, and facility-based care. Ancillary services include diagnostic services (such as laboratories and radiology), therapeutic services (including home healthcare), physical and occupational therapist, pharmacists, and durable medical equipment and supply companies. 
Number and Locations of Providers  
Factors such as health plan characteristics, provider access, population characteristics, purchaser and consumer preferences, and health plan goals influence network design. We will now review how these factors specifically influence the number and locations of healthcare practitioners, hospitals, and facilities needed by the health plan. 
Practitioners 
• Plan characteristics. 
o Level of managed care. In general, more highly managed plans (plans that practice more managed care techniques and concepts) need fewer providers than more loosely managed plans. For instance, an HMO, which is highly managed, requires fewer providers than does a PPO or POS product with the same number of members. 
o Size of plan. Large plans typically need fewer providers per 1,000 members than do small plans because large plans can benefit from economies of scale and other efficiencies. However, if the membership in a large plan is geographically widespread, the plan will likely need a broader panel to provide adequate access to care and services. 
• Provider access. 
o A provider-to-member ratio is a ratio of the number of providers available to plan members to the number of members (usually number of providers per 1,000 members). Ratios can be used for both PCPs and specialists. 
o Geographic distribution is based on the number of providers within a certain number of miles and/or a certain number of minutes of driving time. Software is used to measure the accessibility of healthcare networks and evaluate geographic distribution for specific provider types. For example, to maximize access a plan may require that its network have at least two PCPs within a three-mile radius of each ZIP code in the service area. Or a network might include at least two PCPs within a given radius of members’ homes (such as an eight-mile radius for urban areas or a 20-mile radius for rural areas). Drive time refers to how long members must drive to reach a provider. Drive time is typically set at 15 minutes for urban areas and up to 30 minutes for rural areas. In some 

states, health plan licensure bodies (such as the Department of Insurance) have established requirements for access based on time or distance. 
o Other considerations. Provider capacity to accept patients and the clinical skills of various providers are other factors that can also impact staffing needs. 
• Population characteristics. Demographic characteristics of plan membership such as age, sex, income, ethnicity, and education level influence both the numbers and types of providers in the network. For example, networks of plans with large numbers of women and children typically include large numbers of OB/GYNs and pediatricians. Plan networks serving Medicare beneficiaries typically have larger numbers of providers and a broader mix of specialists than networks serving similarly sized younger populations. 
• Purchaser and consumer preferences. Primary factors that influence customers’ selections among health plans are perceptions of quality, access to care, and costs. 
o Perceived quality. If perceived quality is the dominant consideration, then the actual composition of the network and provider selection criteria are key elements of the network development. 
o Access. If access is the major issue for customers, a large, very inclusive network is desirable. 
* PCPs. For purchasers and members the primary care panel is typically the largest and most important component of the provider network. Larger PCP panels tend to result in higher market share and high levels of member acceptance and satisfaction, but they can result in higher plan costs. Limiting the size of the PCP panel can reduce costs for administration and network management, but these reductions are generally outweighed by customer preferences for larger PCP panels. 
* Specialists. The size of the specialist panel is typically less important to customers that the size of the PCP panel. Therefore, health plans can often limit specialist panels to include only providers who offer the highest-quality, most cost-effective care in the service area. 
Hospitals and Other Facilities 
The goal of a health plan is to include enough facilities in its network to effectively serve the plan’s membership. Therefore, the network needs the appropriate number of hospitals and facilities of the appropriate types and in the appropriate locations. Many of the factors that affect the number of practitioners needed in a network also affect the number and locations of hospitals and other facilities. Considerations include: 
• access by plan members, 
service capacity, types and quality of services offered, accreditation status, reputation within the service area, cost and use of resources, level of participation in health plans, and willingness to agree to contract terms acceptable to the health plan. 
Member preference may also affect the number of facilities included in a network if preferences are strongly divided among facilities. Also, if a plan wants to contract with a hospital that is part of a multi-hospital entity, the plan may also have to contract with the other hospitals that belong to the entity. 
Provider Recruitment and Selection 
Recruitment 
During a health plan’s analysis of the market, discussed earlier in this module, the plan gathers, analyzes, and understands important information about the provider community in the service area, including the number and locations of providers. The following sources provide additional information about providers and may be used in the recruitment process: 
• Purchasers, plan members, plan personnel, and other providers. 
Recommendations from purchasers and enrollees are very valuable to the plan. Inclusion of providers recommended by purchasers and enrollees can give the health plan a competitive advantage when negotiating with purchasers and can also help sell the plan to potential members. 
• Local, state, and national medical societies 
• Directories and lists 
• Provider directories from competing plans 
During the recruitment phase of the network development process, a health plan typically sends a mass mailing to the providers in the service area. This mailing introduces the health plan and gives information about it. It usually describes the plan’s credentialing process and may include a copy of the plan’s fee schedule and a provider contract. 
Selection 
To be selected by a health plan for its network, a provider must demonstrate to the plan that she is able to meet the needs of the plan and its members. Major components of provider selection process are: 
• application, 
credentialing, and  recredentialing. 
These are discussed below. 
Application 
The selection process begins with the submission of an application by the provider. Although application forms vary, most include questions on the following: 
basic demographic information office information (location, phone numbers, limitations) education and training work history professional licenses certifications (specialty, DEA) specialty care certification or eligibility hospital affiliations malpractice insurance information malpractice claims history references 
Credentialing 
Once a health plan receives the provider application, it begins the credentialing process. This includes reviewing and verifying the information submitted on the application form, determining the provider’s current clinical competence, and verifying that the provider meets the health plan’s preestablished criteria for participation in the network.  
The Importance of Credentialing 
The goal of health plans is to offer members a delivery network that includes high-quality providers. Specifically, credentialing addresses these objectives: 
• evaluating providers and determining which are the most qualified, 
• minimizing the liability and other legal risks associated with medical practice by eliminating providers whose histories and practice patterns indicate that they might pose a legal risk for the plan, and 
• meeting the requirements of accrediting bodies and regulators for accreditation or licensure.  
Because credentialing is such an important part of the selection process, we will examine credentialing in detail, review who typically performs credentialing, describe 

how the credentialing process works, and discuss standards used in the credentialing process. 
Credentialing—Who Does It? 
The responsibility for credentialing varies from plan to plan. In some plans credentialing is handled by a committee or department, while in others it is performed by an individual. In still other plans, credentialing is contracted to external entities called credentialing verification organizations (CVOs). Practitioners are usually included in the credentialing committee or serve on the review body; they provide technical knowledge and peer perspectives in the credentialing process. 
The Credentialing Process 
As mentioned, the credentialing process begins with the provider’s submission to the health plan of a completed application (and required supporting documentation). The next steps in the process are completed by the health plan and include: 
 review of the application,  verification of the documentation and information,  determination of the need for additional documentation or follow-up, and  request for any information required to verify credentials. 
The health plan may also perform site inspections of the provider’s offices and may inspect and evaluate medical records on site. Note that the credentialing process typically is completed before the health plan contracts with the provider. 
Standards Used in Credentialing—Guidelines, Policies, Procedures, and Criteria 
Health plans establish and utilize plan-specific guidelines for credentialing, with each plan’s guidelines reflecting the unique characteristics of the plan. Written policies define the requirements for participation in the network and identify the specific documentation that will be used to verify requirements. Procedures describe how the process is performed. Criteria are used to assess a practitioner’s ability to deliver necessary care to health plan members and typically include licensure, relevant training and/or experience, and disclosure of any issues that may affect care delivered (such as health issues).  
Verification 
As noted, during credentialing the plan verifies the information submitted by the provider on the application form and validates that the provider meets the health plan’s preestablished criteria for participation in its network. To ensure that credentialing decisions are based on accurate and current information, health plans are required to obtain documents directly from educational institutions and agencies (primary sources). Health plans typically delegate primary source verification activities to third-party CVOs.  
Many of the standards and criteria used by health plans in credentialing verification are based on existing standards established by accrediting agencies such as URAC. In addition, a health plan is required to obtain information relating to malpractice, licensure, actions taken related to professional reviews, actions taken by the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), and Medicare/Medicaid exclusions. The National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) is a repository for information relating to malpractice, licensure, and actions taken related to professional reviews.  
The National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) 1 
The legislation that led to the creation of the NPDB was enacted because the U.S. Congress believed that the increasing occurrence of medical malpractice litigation and the need to improve the quality of medical care had become nationwide problems that warranted greater efforts than any individual state could undertake. The intent is to improve the quality of healthcare by encouraging state licensing boards, hospitals, and other healthcare entities and professional societies to identify and discipline those who engage in unprofessional behavior, and to restrict the ability of incompetent physicians, dentists, and other healthcare practitioners to move from state to state without disclosure or discovery of previous medical malpractice payment and adverse action history. Adverse actions can involve licensure, clinical privileges, professional society membership, and exclusions from Medicare and Medicaid. 
The NPDB is primarily an alert or flagging system intended to facilitate a comprehensive review of healthcare practitioners' professional credentials. The information contained in the NPDB is intended to direct discrete inquiry into, and scrutiny of, specific areas of a practitioner's licensure, professional society memberships, medical malpractice payment history, and record of clinical privileges. The information contained in the NPDB should be considered together with other relevant data in evaluating a practitioner's credentials; it is intended to augment, not replace, traditional forms of credentials review. 
Credentialing—Organizational Providers 
During the credentialing process, health plans are required to evaluate the quality of organizations such as hospitals, nursing homes, and home health agencies. Health plans must verify that these organizations are in good standing with regulatory bodies and accredited by the appropriate accrediting body.  
The Selection Decision 
The health plan’s decision to either select or not select a provider for its network is based on the needs of the health plan and the provider’s qualifications. Selection decisions cannot be based solely on the provider’s membership in another organization such as a hospital or medical group. Health plans must apply standards consistently and fairly. Applying standards consistency and fairly and adhering to the plan’s written policies and procedures reduce issues that can result in legal actions by providers.  
Recredentialing 
As noted, the credentialing process begins before the provider receives a final contract. Once a plan contracts with a provider, it begins an ongoing process of periodically reviewing the qualifications of the provider and verifying that the provider still meets the standards for participation in the network. This process is known as recredentialing and is typically performed every two to three years. 
During recredentialing the health plan verifies the information in the provider’s credentialing data file that is subject to change over time. Examples include licensure, sanctions, certifications, competence, or health status that might affect the provider’s ability to perform services defined in the health plan contract. Many plans also consider results from its quality management and utilization management programs as well as member satisfaction surveys and any member complaints. Contracting 
Once a health plan has selected a provider for its network, the plan presents to the provider an initial contract that specifies the terms of their agreement. The health plan and provider may negotiate and agree to change some of the terms of the contract. When both parties have reached final agreement on the terms, they each sign the contract and it takes effect. 
A properly executed contract serves the following important purposes:  
• ensuring that both parties understand and consent to their responsibilities to each other, 
• providing a reference for clarification of responsibilities in case there is a misunderstanding or disagreement between the parties, and 
• serving as evidence in a legal action by the aggrieved party if either party feels that the other has failed to live up to its responsibilities. 
Contract Provisions 
Health plan provider contracts generally include many provisions. Provisions may be included in the body of the contract, included in exhibits attached to the contract, or incorporated by reference in the contract. Incorporation by reference occurs when a document is made a part of the contract by being referred to in the body of the contract. For instance, a health plan’s provider manual is often incorporate by reference into provider contracts.  
Since provider contracts are based on the characteristics of the health plan, contracts and contract provisions vary from contract to contract. Important provisions that are typically found in provider contracts are discussed below. 
The Provider Manual 
A provider manual is a document that contains information about a provider’s rights and responsibilities as a part of a health plan’s network. Provider manuals are usually incorporated by reference into the contract or are included as exhibits, as these documents tend to change frequently. By including the provider manual as an exhibit or incorporating it by reference, the manual can be changed without necessitating a change to the entire contract.  
Provider Responsibilities 
The contract defines the responsibilities of both the provider and the health plan. The following are some provider responsibilities commonly found in provider contracts: 
• Provider services. The contract typically includes a general description of the healthcare services that the provider agrees to furnish and a more detailed and specific description of how the services will be provided. 
• Administrative policies. The contract generally defines the health plan’s administrative policies and procedures that the provider agrees to follow. These policies are typically related to billing, including the required type of claim form and coding and requirements for timely filing of claims. 
• Credentialing and recredentialing. Contracts normally require that the provider cooperate with the health plan’s credentialing and recredentialing processes. 
• Utilization management and quality management. The contract generally requires providers to cooperate with the plan’s utilization management and quality management programs. 
• Medical records. The contract typically requires providers to maintain complete and accurate medical records and allow health plan staff to access them when needed. Health plans need access to medical records for a variety of purposes such as quality management, utilization management, accreditation, audits and other types of reviews. 
• Payment in full. Most contracts include a no balance billing provision, which requires the provider to accept the amount that the plan pays for medical services as payment in full and to agree not to bill the plan member for additional amounts except for copayments, coninsurance, and deductibles. Most contracts also include a hold harmless provision, which forbids providers from seeking compensation from patients if the health plan fails to compensate them because of insolvency or for any other reason. 
Health Plan Responsibilities 
The following are some health plan responsibilities commonly found in provider contracts: 
• Payment. The contract specifies how the plan will compensate the provider. Since this changes frequently, it is typically included as an exhibit attached to the contract rather than in the body of the contract. 
• Timely payment. The contract specifies the time period within which the health plan will provide payment to the provider for services rendered. 
• Risk-sharing and incentive programs. The contract describes any incentive or risk-sharing plans such as withhold arrangements. 
• Eligibility information. The contract affirms the health plan’s responsibility to provide information on member eligibility and benefit levels. This information helps providers identify members and services covered by the plan. The contract also specifies how the health plan will provide this information (telephone, VRU, electronically, real time or batch, etc.). 
Termination Provisions 
Termination provisions, which are applicable to both the health plan and provider, stipulate how and under what circumstances the parties may end the contract. Generally, the provider and the health plan have the same rights to terminate the contract. Contracts generally can be terminated with cause or without cause, and health plans use different procedures for each. 
• Termination with cause is permitted by all standard contracts. A termination with cause occurs when one party does not live up to its contractual obligations or breaches the contract. For example, a provider fails to provide the services required by the contract, or a plan fails to compensate the provider. Contracts generally include a cure provision, which gives the party that breaches the contract a specified a time period (usually 60 or 90 days) to remedy the problem and avoid termination. Also, most contracts include a due process clause, which gives a provider that has been terminated with cause the right to appeal. 
• Termination without cause may or may not be allowed by a contract; some states do not permit it. A termination without cause occurs when the plan or provider terminates the contract without providing a reason or offering an appeals process. The terminating party is often required to give at least a 90-day notice. Generally health plans terminate providers without cause for business reasons rather than reasons related to the provider’s performance.  
The Tone of the Contract 
In addition to describing the responsibilities of the parties, the contract gives both parties an opportunity to establish the tone and objectives of the relationship. The contract can define the working relationship between the health plan and the provider as either detailed and formal or open-ended and informal. The contract can also either allow for substantial independent authority or include multiple checks and balances.  
The tone and structure of the contract also provide an opportunity for the health plan to influence the nature of the business relationship with the provider. For example, the provider contract can be used by the plan to establish a collaborative relationship with the provider—one in which the provider is included in decisions regarding policies that affect her, such as quality management or utilization management. These types of relationships tend to result in increased provider cooperation with health plan initiatives. 
Network Maintenance and Provider Services 
Following provider recruitment, selection, and contracting, the health plan focuses on activities essential to maintaining and managing the network. In this section we discuss three important network management functions: provider orientation, peer review, and provider services. 
Provider Orientation 
The health plan provides orientations to introduce itself to new providers and acquaint them with its systems and operations. Also during orientation the plan provides training in various systems such as utilization review, authorization systems, quality control, and others, as well as in processes and information relevant to the provider’s specific contract and services.  
The plan provides a written manual of its policies and procedures relevant to the participating provider. The purpose of this manual is to ensure that the provider understands the various aspects of participation and the procedures to follow. Health plans typically review the manual with the provider during the orientation meeting. 
During orientation the health plan informs the provider of its system of regular communications between the health plan and the providers. Health plans provide updates such as new or revised clinical guidelines, benefit changes and claims/coding information, and other information necessary to keep providers informed of changes and updates. Updates are provided through various mechanisms including meetings, newsletters, and/or bulletins. 
Peer Review 
Another important network management function is peer review. Peer review is the evaluation of a provider’s performance by a peer—usually another provider in the same medical specialty and geographic area. Peer review programs and processes will the discussed in detail in the following module. 
Provider Services 
The goal of health plan provider services is to maintain communications with providers. Provider services staff typically visit provider offices or clinics to distribute, share, and explain information. Provider services staff also give support, provide training to the provider office staff, and in some cases offer onsite problem-solving to providers who are experiencing administrative difficulties. 
The provider services area and staff are also responsible for designing and implementing the health plan’s strategies for ensuring provider satisfaction with the health plan. Strategies used by some plans to increase provider satisfaction include conducting surveys of provider satisfaction and needs; communicating through meetings, newsletters, and office visits; and including providers in decisions and programs that affect them, such as quality and utilization management. 
Conclusion 
In developing and maintaining a provider network, a health plan must consider a large number of factors. In setting up its network, it must look at the existing market, including providers, competitors, employers, population, service area, and economy. The plan must take into account its own characteristics (plan type, products, etc.), as well as applicable laws, regulations, and accreditation standards. The plan must ensure that its network meets the needs of its members in terms of provider types, the number of providers, and their locations. Doing so involves a variety of activities, such as provider recruitment, selection, credentialing, and contracting, as well as ongoing activities needed to maintain the network, such as recredentialing, peer review, and provider services. 
Note 
                                                          
1  National Practitioner Data Bank. August 2010. www.npdb-nipdb.hrsa.gov  

14 Utilization Management 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• identify and describe the main strategies of utilization management;  define case management and describe how it works;  describe disease management; and 
• define clinical practice guidelines, evidence-based healthcare, and health literacy. 
To operate effectively, a health plan must be able to manage both the cost and the quality of healthcare services. Without adequate cost management, a plan may not be able to maintain its financial viability. And without adequate quality management, it may not be able to meet the healthcare and service quality needs of members, providers, purchasers, and regulatory and accrediting bodies. The system that health plans and their providers use to achieve and maintain both high quality and cost-effectiveness is referred to as medical management (or care management). 
Medical management activities can be divided into three broad categories: 
• Utilization management (UM) refers to health plan programs that manage the use of medical services so that plan members receive necessary and appropriate care in a cost-effective manner and in an appropriate setting. Simply stated, the goal of UM is for the member to receive the right services at the right time in the right place. UM includes many strategies, techniques, and approaches, including case management and disease management. 
• Clinical practice management involves the development and implementation of criteria and parameters for the delivery of healthcare services to plan members.  
• Quality management (QM) is an organization-wide process of measuring and improving the quality of the healthcare and services a health plan’s members receive.  
In this module we introduce the basics of utilization management. We begin by describing some UM strategies such as preventive care, self-care, decision support, and utilization review. We then provide an overview of case management and disease management, and we end by discussing three issues that arise in relation to these approaches: clinical practice guidelines, evidence-based healthcare, and health literacy. Note that utilization review is examined in detail in the next module, and quality management is addressed in two later modules. 
 
 
Utilization Management 
Utilization management involves all the components of a health plan’s healthcare delivery system, including primary care, specialty care, and both inpatient and outpatient care in hospitals and other facilities. It also affects emergency care, pharmaceuticals, and ancillary services (such as X-ray and laboratory work). A health plan may conduct its own utilization management, or it may contract with an external organization that specialized in UM to perform some or all UM functions.  
In this section we will look at UM strategies and techniques. How these strategies are applied by a health plan depends on its member population. This is because UM strategies are used either to address the needs of members with existing health conditions (in the case of utilization review, case management, and disease management) or to help members at risk of developing conditions (preventive care). 
Preventive Care Programs 
Preventive care programs are designed to help plan members stay healthy and can reduce healthcare costs by reducing the need for diagnostic and therapeutic services, pharmaceuticals, and inpatient hospital care. Therefore, health plans offer a variety of such programs and encourage members to obtain preventive services.  
Health Risk Assessment 
Not every health plan member needs every type of preventive care. To help determine which programs are likely to be the most effective for their member populations, health plans must identify and assess their members’ healthcare needs and health risks. Health plans typically do this by means of an analysis of healthcare claims and/or a health risk assessment.  
A health risk assessment (HRA) (or health risk appraisal) is a process by which a health plan uses information about a plan member’s current health status, personal and family health history, and health-related behaviors to determine the member’s likelihood of experiencing specific illnesses or injuries. By identifying members who are at risk of developing certain health problems and helping them take steps to reduce their risk, the plan can improve health outcomes, reduce the need for complex and extended care, and reduce costs. 
Health plans can gather HRA information from a variety of sources, including providers, plan records, and surveys administered to members. To analyze HRA data, health plans typically use software programs that enable it to tabulate data for the whole member population or for certain segments based on risk levels for specific diseases and/or demographic characteristics (such as occupation, age, gender, income level, race, or ethnicity).  
Preventive Care Programs 
After a health plan has identified the health risks present in its member population, it can develop and promote appropriate preventive care programs to address the needs of its members. For example, members at high risk of developing coronary artery disease (CAD) can be provided with information about CAD, such as its symptoms, possible complications, and recommendations for reducing risks. Most often members receive such information from their primary care practitioners (PCPs), but it may come directly from the plan. For example, a plan might send members regular reminders about healthy behaviors and encourage screenings at appropriate intervals.  
The preventive care initiatives most often adopted by health plans include the following:  
 Immunization programs monitor and promote the administration of vaccines to children for chicken pox, mumps, and measles, as well as adults for influenza and pneumonia. 
 Health promotion programs (wellness programs) educate members and motivate them to prevent illness and injury and promote good health through lifestyle choices, such as stopping smoking, managing weigh, eating healthily, exercising, and managing stress. Maternity management programs are commonly included in health promotion programs; they provide education to promote prenatal care and help identify high-risk pregnancies. 
 Screening programs seek to determine if a health condition is present even if a member has not experienced symptoms. Commonly used screening tools include blood pressure measurements, cholesterol level checks, fecal occult blood tests, and (for women) cervical cancer screening and mammograms. 
Self-Care Programs 
Health plan members frequently have minor health problems that they can treat themselves without the assistance of healthcare professionals. Self-care programs educate members on how to distinguish between minor illnesses or injuries and serious conditions and how to effectively treat minor problems with readily available means such as diet, application of heat or cold, or over-the-counter medications. These programs can lower healthcare utilization and costs by reducing unnecessary visits to doctors’ offices or emergency rooms. However, self-care programs are not intended to supersede or eliminate physicians’ services but to complement them. 
Plans make self-care information available to members in a variety of ways, including in newsletters, websites, and recorded messages accessible by telephone; through providers; or in group help sessions. Newsletters and websites can include guidance on the treatment of minor illnesses and injuries and instructions on how to perform screenings such as breast or testicular self-examinations, skin cancer checks, or blood pressure monitoring. For members with medical conditions requiring ongoing management (such as arthritis, diabetes, and asthma), there may be more detailed selfcare guides providing easy-to-understand information about the condition and describing steps members can take to reduce symptoms, prevent complications, and improve dayto-day functioning. 
Decision Support Programs 
Plan members often know they need medical care but don’t know which services are most appropriate, so they seek care that is unnecessary or inadequate. Decision support programs provide members with educational materials and advice from healthcare professionals to help them make informed healthcare decisions. The types of decision support programs health plans use most often are: 
• web-based decision support tools,   telephone triage programs, and   shared decision-making programs.  
Web-Based Decision Support Tools 
Health plans maintain websites with health and wellness information for members, and they have developed a number of web-based tools to deliver targeted information and personalized support. In this way plans foster better healthcare decisions by members and reach out to those with chronic conditions, and by doing so they promote the appropriate utilization of healthcare services and improve health outcomes. Some of the most common tools are the following: 
• Health risk assessment (HRA)—an online questionnaire that helps a member accurately determine his health status, gives him a personal risk assessment, and directs him to next-step tools. 
• Health risk tools and trackers—online tools with which members can measure certain indicators of health risk (such as body mass index or BMI) and track their progress toward meeting their health goals (such eating more vegetables or exercising more regularly). 
• Health and prevention information—education on health and fitness topics and on the prevention and treatment of common conditions like hypertension and diabetes.  
• Drug information—comparisons of different drugs used for the same conditions, and sometimes information on drug interactions and on the plan’s drug formulary and how members can save money by using certain drugs. 
• Provider report cards—physician and hospital data to assist consumers in making decisions on where to seek care.  
• Personal health records (PHRs)—an application that enables a person to create, review, annotate, and maintain a record of her health conditions, medications, allergies, vaccination history, visit history, and communications with their healthcare providers, and to share this information with appropriate healthcare providers. 
Telephone Triage Programs 
Many health plans offer telephone triage programs (medical advice lines) to help members determine if they need medical attention and if so what kind. For example, a person may wonder whether a fever and sore throat are simply symptoms of a cold or rather indications of something more serious such as strep throat, and a triage program can advise him. Some of the problems commonly reported are headaches, cough, sore throat, nausea and vomiting, fever, ear pain and stuffiness, skin problems, chest pain, abdominal pain, and lower back pain. 
Telephone triage programs help members decide if they should seek immediate attention at an emergency room, make an appointment with a healthcare provider, or treat the condition themselves. If the situation is urgent, triage staff can notify a local emergency room or urgent care center of the member’s needs and planned arrival. If the case is not urgent but requires care by a physician, staff can assist in scheduling an appointment. In some cases triage staff can also authorize referrals and expedite appointments for specialty care. If self-care is indicated, staff can provide information on ways to relieve symptoms and hasten recovery. 
Telephone triage programs are typically staffed by nurses or nurse practitioners who are trained to assess members’ needs and direct them to the appropriate care. They are generally directed by physicians with relevant clinical experience and training in managing telephone triage lines. Triage programs also use non-clinical personnel to answer calls, obtain non-medical data, and route calls to the appropriate clinical staff.  
Staff use a variety of decision support tools to assist them in handling calls, ranging from simple lists of questions and responses to interactive computer programs with preprogrammed algorithms of questions and instructions. Clinical staff can usually contact the members’ physicians or other healthcare professionals such as pharmacists for direct assistance as well.  
Shared Decision-Making Programs 
Healthcare providers routinely give patients information about procedures or treatment options so that they can make informed choices. Shared decision-making programs take this a step further by providing members with in-depth information about diseases, procedures, and treatment alternatives and encouraging them to actively participate in healthcare decisions. Some plans call this value-based healthcare because the member’s decisions are based on her own personal values as applied to her situation, including her age, general health or quality of life, and perception of the effects of a treatment (such as chemotherapy).  
Although information for shared decision-making comes primarily from healthcare providers, there are a variety of sources. Printed materials, websites, videotapes or audiotapes, personal or group counseling, support groups, and interactive computer programs can provide up-to-date information about conditions, diagnostic and treatment options, and expected outcomes. Health plans can also provide checklists of questions that members can use as a guide in talking to providers or conducting independent research. 
Not all conditions are appropriate for shared decision-making programs. For some illnesses and injuries, the medical community considers one approach to care clearly superior in terms of safety and effectiveness, and the provider may discuss only this approach, its risks and benefits, and the risks of no treatment. For other illnesses and injuries (such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, low back pain, and infertility), several treatment options are accepted as valid and effective, and in these cases shared decision-making allows members to weigh the risks and benefits of various alternatives and to choose their own course of treatment. (In either case, however, the decision is ultimately up to the member.) 
Utilization Review 
Utilization review (UR) is an evaluation of the medical necessity, appropriateness, and cost-effectiveness of healthcare services and treatment plans for a given patient. UR can be conducted before treatment begins (pre-service review), while it is in progress (concurrent review), or after it ends (post-service review). UR is most often used for hospital admissions but may also be applied to some outpatient services. 
Utilization review is performed by healthcare professionals, such as nurses or physicians, employed by or contracted with the health plan. Many health plans contract with an outside utilization review organization (URO). Because a URO is independent of the health plan, its involvement can give patients and purchasers added assurance that UR decisions are correct and appropriate. Health plans must give members and providers the right to appeal decision to not approve certain services, and a plan may contract appeals to a URO. 
Case Management 
A key utilization management technique is case management, a process of identifying members with special healthcare needs, developing an individualized strategy to meet their needs, and coordinating and monitoring their healthcare. Case management is sometimes referred to as resource management as a key concept is to assist the member in finding and utilizing available and applicable resources, which include but are not limited to healthcare.  
Case management programs are designed to:  
• improve or stabilize a member’s overall health status by preventing complications and the deterioration of existing medical conditions,  optimize the use of healthcare and other resources,  improve member compliance with provider recommendations for care,  improve coordination and continuity of care, and  utilize community resources to enhance and support the member’s health. 
The ultimate goal is to achieve the optimal healthcare outcome in an efficient and costeffective manner. The case management process includes five basic steps: case identification, assessment, planning, implementation/monitoring, and evaluation. 
The Application of Case Management 
Health plans commonly use case management for high-risk, high-cost, and/or chronic cases.  
• A high-risk case involves a complex or catastrophic illness or injury that requires extensive medical intervention and treatment. Often there are multiple medical problems. An example would be someone who suffered multiple broken bones and internal injuries in an accident and will require ongoing rehabilitation and staged surgeries.  
• A high-cost case requires large expenditures or extensive human and technological resources. An example would be a premature infant requiring months in a neonatal intensive care unit, home health follow-up, parental training, and frequent out-patient check-ups.  
• A chronic case involves conditions that persist for long periods or for the patient’s lifetime (such as chronic respiratory conditions). 
Some of the medical conditions for which case management may be appropriate include AIDS, stroke, burns, chronic respiratory conditions, kidney failure, amputation, cancer, neonatal complications, brain injuries, certain cardiovascular conditions, congenital defects, and spinal cord injuries.  
Case Identification 
To identify members who might be good candidates for case management, health plans examine the following factors:  
• the medical condition or diagnosis;  the type of treatment being received;  the use of prescription drugs;  the level of resource utilization (such as consultation by multiple providers); 
• the cost of care, especially when it is above a certain threshold (such as 
$25,000);  
• the length and frequency of hospital stays (hospital stays that are unusually long or multiple readmissions for the same diagnosis); and  financial, social, and psychosocial factors that may affect the member’s medical 
condition. 
After this information has been collected, it is evaluated to determine the member’s eligibility for participation in the case management program. The majority of cases are identified during utilization review, but health plans also receive referrals from providers, family members, employers, health plan personnel, and hospital utilization management or discharge planning staff. Plans can also identify cases through health risk appraisal and the analysis of utilization data.  
Assessment and Planning—The Case Manager 
A member entering a case management program is assigned a case manager, who assesses her healthcare needs and develops a plan of treatment. In doing so, he works with the member, her physician or physicians, any other relevant members of her medical team, and (if the member wishes) family members. Case managers are typically nurses but may be physicians, social workers, or other healthcare professionals. A health plan may employ case managers or contract with an outside organization. Provider groups may have their own case managers.  
The case manager is knowledgeable about medical conditions and interventions as well as the benefits of the health plan, and he tries to achieve the best possible use of the member’s coverage. Case managers are often also familiar with community resources and may recommend them to supplement or support the member’s healthcare and/or her family’s ability to care for her. Community resources may include transportation services, religious or other support groups, respite care to relieve family caregivers, and others. 
In addition to the areas of knowledge mentioned above, a case manager should be familiar with psychosocial issues; legal, regulatory, and ethical issues related to case management; and utilization review processes and techniques. They need research and analytical skills, interpersonal and communication skills, project management skills, and computer skills.  
Implementation/Monitoring and Evaluation 
During the course of treatment, the case manager works with the member’s healthcare team to coordinate and monitor services and identify the goals of planned interventions. He documents the member’s progress to determine if she is compliant with physicians’ recommendations, if the stated goals are being achieved, and if the original goals are still appropriate. As the patient’s condition evolves, new measures and approaches to care may be needed, or the care plan may need to be adjusted. During all of this, the care manager educates the member and her family. He remains in close communication with the physician in charge, who approves all care decisions.  
After case management ends, the case manager conducts a final evaluation of the effectiveness of the case management services that were provided. This evaluation focuses on quality of care, member and family satisfaction, continuity of care, and outcomes. Results of the evaluation are reported to the health plan. 
Disease Management 
Disease management (DM) (also called disease state management or population management) is a coordinated system of preventive, diagnostic, and therapeutic measures intended to provide cost-effective, quality healthcare for a patient population that has a certain chronic illness or medical condition or is at risk of developing it. DM focuses on the comprehensive management of a patient population over time rather than on individual episodes of medical care.  
One of the reasons for the development of disease management is the high level of spending on chronic diseases. Over 130 million Americans (about half of all adults) suffer from a chronic condition such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, arthritis, back pain, depression, diabetes, osteoporosis, and asthma, and this number will surely continue to grow with the aging of the population.1 The costs of the diagnosis and treatment of these conditions are enormous.  
Another factor in the growth of DM is the need to provide quality care to patients with chronic diseases. Long-term and short-term outcomes of the treatment of these diseases vary greatly, and this results, at least in part, from inconsistencies in treatment approaches from one provider to another and from one patient to another. Disease management improves the quality of care by developing a more comprehensive and uniform approach to treatment.  
One way to better understand what disease management is is to look at how it differs from traditional medical care:2 
• DM focuses on populations of patients, not individuals. 
• In DM the delivery of healthcare is highly coordinated and integrated across providers, sites, and patients. Providers work together in teams to reduce inefficiencies and fragmentation and improve the overall quality of care.  
• DM promotes standardization of care, encouraging all physicians in the program to provide the same level of care as the doctors with the best outcomes.  
• DM programs often apply business approaches such as total quality management and continuous quality improvement.  
The Application of Disease Management 
DM programs are most effective for common chronic illnesses that have variable outcomes and high costs. Specifically, DM may be indicated for medical conditions that: 
• are chronic in nature;   are likely to have high costs over time; 
• have high variability in patterns of treatment from patient to patient and physician to physician; 
• have a high rate of preventable complications, some or all of which may result in the use of more costly services such as emergency room visits and hospital readmissions;  have low rates of patient compliance with recommended treatments; 
• have optimal treatments described in the medical literature or for which evidencebased guidelines exist or can be developed; or 

• can be managed on an outpatient basis using low-technology, nonsurgical approaches that the health plan can provide. 
Disease Management and Health Plans 
DM programs were first developed in the early 1990s by pharmaceutical companies, but today many health plans have them. A plan may have its own DM program, operate one in conjunction with a drug company, or contract out to an independent DM organization. 
A health plan DM program is typically an outreach and support program for plan members with certain diseases. A plan may use medical records, referrals, or claims information to identify such members. The goal is to ensure that these people receive the most appropriate healthcare and have access to support services. Some plans’ DM programs focus on a single illness, while others address multiple illnesses. Ancillary providers, such as durable medical equipment suppliers, oxygen/respiratory therapy services, and home health agencies provide additional support to DM programs.  
Health plans may also address chronic illnesses by distributing information to members through cooperative ventures with organizations such as the American Diabetes Association or the American Lung Association. Many plans are enhancing their technical capabilities and offering online information themselves or providing links to health websites. 
Other Issues 
Clinical Practice Guidelines 
Clinical practice guidelines are an important element of utilization management, disease management, and quality management. They may include recommendations not only on the best treatment approach but also on how to implement this approach to obtain the best results. They are intended to help providers achieve the best clinical result in the most cost-effective way and to reduce the variation in treatment from one provider to another and from one patient to another. Clinical practice guidelines can be developed by a health plan itself or obtained from outside sources (as will be discussed in the module on quality management). 
A health plan typically gives providers and members information about clinical practice guidelines and how to follow them. For example, a plan’s guidelines for diabetes patients include annual glaucoma screening, so each year the plan reminds patients (by email, mail, or telephone) to schedule an eye exam, and it may also remind primary care physicians to encourage the members to have this done.  
One challenge presented by clinical practice guidelines is to make them sufficiently specific and clinical that providers can understand and follow them, yet also understandable to members. Obviously, guidelines may need to take different forms for different audiences. For example, for providers a health plan may use the clinical practice guidelines for diabetes from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, but for members it may use educational materials from the American Diabetes Association.  
Evidence-Based Healthcare 
In evidence-based healthcare the best evidence from current medical research is used in making decisions about the care of a patient. When a therapeutic intervention is being considered, the question should be asked: Does valid clinical research show that if a certain drug, therapy, surgery, etc., is used the patient’s condition will not only improve, but improve faster than if one does nothing or uses another approach? For a diagnostic test or procedure, the question is: Will the results of the test or procedure provide information that is not already known, and will the information aid the physician in selecting the appropriate treatment? 
Health Literacy 
In this module we have mentioned a number of ways in which health plan members can be involved in their healthcare and in making decisions about it—self-care, shared decision-making, disease management, and clinical practice guidelines. But to be involved in this way, and indeed even to follow instructions from healthcare providers, members must be able to understand the information and communications they receive. If they do not, they cannot really participate in their own healthcare decisions, and they may even inadvertently fail to adhere to treatment or behavioral recommendations, leading to poor health outcomes and often unnecessary healthcare expenditures. 
The issue here is health literacy, the ability to understand communications related to health and healthcare. A person may be well educated, but that does not mean she can understand a document that uses medical or legal terminology. And many people do not have much education or are not native speakers of English. To address this problem, health plans must strive to convey information to members in language the average person can understand.  
Accreditation agencies and government regulators require health plan communications with members to be written in easily understandable language. Many also have requirements for meeting the needs of non-English-speaking members. The federal 
Department of Health and Human Services has launched a National Action Plan to Improve Health Literacy, which seeks to engage organizations, professionals, policymakers, communities, individuals, and families in efforts to improve health literacy. The plan is based on the principles that everyone has the right to health information that helps them make informed decisions and that health services should be delivered in ways that are understandable and beneficial.3 
Conclusion 
Managing the utilization of healthcare services by health plan members is not just about controlling costs—it is also about improving the quality of care. By reducing both overutilization and underutilization of services, health plans can help members obtain necessary and appropriate care—the right services at the right time and at the right place.  
Utilization management benefit members in other ways as well. Preventive care programs decrease the incidence of illness or injury, facilitate early detection and treatment, and reduce the need for complex, extended care. Self-care and decision support programs give plan members greater control over their own care. Case management and disease management programs help members obtain comprehensive, high-quality, cost-effective care. 
Notes 
                                                 
1
  Center for Disease Control and Prevention. 2010. ?Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion.? www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/overview/index.htm  2  The information in this paragraph is based on: Stan Bernard MD and Donnica L. Moore MD, 
?Live Long and Prosper with Disease Management,? Managed Healthcare (Vol. 7, Number 1, January 1997): 42–43. Used with permission of the publisher. Copyright by Advanstar Communications Inc., which retains all rights to its material. 3  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 2010. National Action Plan to Improve Health Literacy. 

15 Utilization Review 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
 state the main purposes of utilization review;  describe prospective, concurrent, and retrospective UR;  list the criteria used by plans to decide which services will be subject to UR;  identify the main care settings that UR may direct members to; and  identify the main steps of the authorization process. 
In the last module we looked at the types of programs that health plans use to manage utilization of healthcare services. In this module we further explore one of these, utilization review.  
Utilization Review 
In utilization review (UR) a clinical professional working for a health plan reviews a healthcare service that another clinical professional proposes providing to a plan member or has already provided to her and makes a determination of whether that service is medically necessary and appropriate in her case and, therefore, whether the health plan will cover it. UR can be conducted before treatment begins (prospective review), while it is in progress (concurrent review), or after it ends (retrospective review). It is used most often for hospital admissions but also for some outpatient services. 
UR commonly involves authorization—a member or provider submits a request to the plan for a proposed service, and the plan’s UR staff make a determination of whether it will be covered. UR also involves the collection of information and data that a plan uses not only to make particular authorization decisions but also to monitor utilization and promote quality and cost-effective care.  
It should be noted that utilization review may be conducted by entities other than health plans. When a medical group provides healthcare services to the members of a health plan and is compensated by the plan by capitation, the group bears the financial risk for high utilization of services. Therefore, to manage utilization the group may design and operate its own UR and authorization system. However, the group typically provides utilization data to the plan so that it can exercise oversight and guard against underutilization. 
The Purposes of UR 
Utilization review and authorization have three main functions in a health plan.  
• Authorization helps ensure that benefits are paid correctly.  
• Quality and cost-effectiveness are promoted, in part through clinical practice guidelines.  
• Information and data collected is used for utilization management and other purposes.  
Benefit Payment 
A health plan authorizes payment for a healthcare service only if it is: 
• covered by the plan and  medically necessary and appropriate. 
Whether a service is covered of course depends on the health plan’s benefit structure and the language of the insurance contract, and this may be determined by nonclinical employees. 
Clinical staff (usually physicians) make decisions about medical necessity and appropriateness. A healthcare service is considered medically necessary if it provided by a physician or other healthcare provider in order to identify or treat an illness or injury and is: 
• consistent with the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of the member’s condition;   in accordance with the standards of good medical practice;  not solely for the convenience of the member, member’s family, physician, or other healthcare provider; and 
• furnished in the least intensive type of medical care setting required by the member’s condition.1 
A service is appropriate if the expected health benefits exceed the risks by a margin wide enough to justify the service.2 
It is important to clarify that in UR health plan staff make a determination of whether the plan will pay for a service, not whether the member may receive the service. If payment is not authorized for a service, because it is not covered or not considered medically necessary and appropriate, the member may obtain it by paying for it herself. For instance, a person might at her own expense have cosmetic surgery or undergo a treatment that is experimental and of unproven effectiveness and safety. 
Quality and Cost-Effectiveness 
Authorization decisions are made by physicians familiar with a wide range of treatment options. As part of the authorization process, these doctors can direct members to the treatments most likely to produce the best outcomes and to the most appropriate providers and care settings, thereby promoting quality and cost-effective care.  
UR staff also improve quality and cost-effectiveness by using clinical practice guidelines to reduce inappropriate variations in provider practice. Many physicians have busy schedules and find it difficult to stay abreast of the current research on all the conditions they treat, and consequently they sometimes the lack the information they need to choose the optimum treatment for a patient. Health plans can support doctors in this area by adopting clinical practice guidelines based on medical research and community standards of medical care, making UR decisions based on these guidelines, and educating physicians about them. In this way unnecessary and ineffective practices can be identified and reduced. 
However, it should be clarified that the goal of UR and clinical practice guidelines is not to eliminate all variation and completely standardize medical care. Some variation is a normal and necessary feature of high-quality care—a doctor’s practice may diverge from the norm in a particular case because of such factors as an allergy to the standard medication or a patient’s own decisions based on her quality of life.  
UR Data  
A great deal of information and data are collected by UR programs and used for a variety of purposes. UR data can show patterns in the utilization of services and areas that may need more utilization management because overutilization or underutilization. For instance, there may be numerous referrals to orthopedic surgeons for uncomplicated lower back pain that can by treated by PCPs with medication and exercise or by physical therapists or chiropractors, indicating that a stricter authorization process may be needed. Or data may reveal that a high percentage of members with diabetes have not been referred to a dietitian, and better education of PCPs may be needed. 
UR data have many other uses. They can be used to evaluate overall network performance or to profile an individual provider’s practice patterns. A plan can determine if it needs more or fewer specialists by considering members’ utilization of different specialty services. Diagnostic and treatment information can be provided to a plan’s claims processing systems to detect possible errors. And UR data are used to comply with internal and external reporting requirements, including those related to accreditation. 
Among the most common utilization measures used in UR are hospitalizations per member per year, hospital bed days per admission, hospital bed days per member, hospital bed days per 1,000 members, specialist encounters per member, authorizations or referrals per PCP per 100 encounters, and authorizations or referrals per 1,000 members per year. 
Types of Utilization Review 
Prospective Review 
Prospective review takes place before a service is provided. It is generally preferable to retrospective review because the member, the doctor, and the plan can reach an understanding before treatment begins about which treatment alternatives and care settings are appropriate, and because the plan can make clear before any expenses are incurred what will be covered and what will not. 
Prospective UR typically involves precertification (prior authorization). If a certain service is proposed, the member or the physician in charge of his care (often his PCP) is required to request authorization of payment beforehand. The UR staff evaluates the request and approves it; or suggests an alternative treatment, provider, or setting; or denies it. In making this decision, UR staff consider a range of alternatives and, using clinical practice guidelines and other established standards of care while taking into account the particular circumstances of the case, determine which of those alternatives is likely to have the best outcome and be the most cost-effective. 
Precertification is normally required for a hospital admission and for some outpatient services such as complex diagnostic tests. In some plans a PCP must obtain an authorization to refer a member to a specialist for treatment.  
Precertification Tools 
A number of tools are used by UR staff in making precertification decisions:  
 Utilization guidelines (such as clinical practice guidelines) indicate accepted treatments for common medical conditions, based on medical research and established standards of care. 
 	Experience-based criteria incorporate generally accepted community standards of practice and the experience and expert opinion of medical directors and other healthcare providers. They are used when medical research is not available. 
 Site appropriateness listings indicate the most appropriate settings for common procedures. Many surgical procedures that were once performed only in a hospital are now routinely done on an outpatient basis.  
 Length-of-stay (LOS) guidelines indicate the average number of days a patient stays in a hospital or other facility based diagnosis, the severity of the condition, and the type of services and procedures prescribed.  
Hospitalization 
If UR staff approve a hospitalization, they determine the expected length of stay; confirm that all parties are aware of the plan’s preadmission testing policies, and begin the process of discharge planning.  
• Preadmission testing policies require members to have tests needed before a procedure (such as X-rays and laboratory tests) done on an outpatient basis 
before entering the hospital. Otherwise a member may be admitted, have a test result that requires postponing the procedure, and be discharged, resulting in an unnecessary stay. Preadmission testing also allows a member to be admitted on the day the procedure is performed instead of earlier, shortening his stay. 
• Discharge planning addresses what will happen when a patient leaves the hospital. During prospective UR, discharge planning typically involves determining what treatments and services should be completed before the member is discharged, where he will go (for instance, to his home or to a skilled nursing facility), and what equipment and services he may need there (such as a wheelchair or home healthcare). It may also identify members who could benefit from case management and disease management and have these services in place by the time they are discharged. 
Concurrent Review 
Concurrent review takes place while treatment is in progress. It is typically used for a long hospital stay and for outpatient services that continue over a considerable time, such as chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy; physical, occupational, and/or speech therapy; home health care; and counseling. 
Concurrent UR involves tracking a patient’s progress and any complications, directing him to appropriate and cost-effective services, and updating goals. UR staff may evaluate and authorize in advance requests for additional services (that is, grant prior authorization) and help direct the course of care by recommending that the patient receive a different level of care or move to a different care setting. For inpatient hospital care, a UR nurse gathers information about the patient’s progress, tracks the total length and cost of care, and continues discharge planning. 
Retrospective Review 
Retrospective review is performed after treatment has been completed. In some cases such as emergency care, there may be an immediate retrospective review of the medical necessity and appropriateness of services provided to a member. But more typically, retrospective review consists of an analysis of claims data and medical records.  
Retrospective UR obviously cannot direct the course of care, but it enables a health plan to identify areas where utilization can be improved. For instance, a retrospective analysis of provider practice patterns might reveal that certain specialists prescribe expensive drugs when comparable outcomes can be achieved using less costly alternatives. It might show many hospital admissions of diabetic patients, indicating the need for more member education. It might identify the inappropriate use of services, which exposes members to health risks and adds to costs. In such cases, UR staff can identify providers whose practice patterns fall outside the norm, discuss their utilization criteria with them, and thereby improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of care. 
Billing Errors and Fraud 
Retrospective review of claims data can also reveal billing errors and sometimes even fraud. Such cases often involve billing codes, numerical codes that correspond to medical services or procedures and that providers use in submitting bills. Honest coding errors often occur—a provider inadvertently uses the wrong code for a service, resulting in a payment that is too high or too low. But in some cases a provider may engage in fraudulent billing schemes, such as upcoding and unbundling. 
• Upcoding is deliberately using the code for a service that is similar or related to the service actually provided but is more expensive. For instance, a doctor might submit a claim using the code for an office visit, when in fact he merely spoke to the patient over the telephone.  
• Unbundling is the submission of separate claims for services that should be billed together as one combined service. Health plans require that certain related services, or certain services performed at the same time, be billed together as a combined service, using one billing code. By unbundling, the provider receives more in total fees than he would have received had the claims been properly submitted as one. For example, instead of submitting a single claim for multiple tests performed at the same time, a laboratory bills each test separately and improperly receives a greater payment. 
Software can be used to analyze claims data and indentify inconsistencies and patterns that may indicate errors or billing schemes. When fraud is suspected, the case is normally turned over to the plan’s special investigations unit. 
Services Subject to UR 
Health plans cover a very large number of healthcare services, and it would be impossible to apply UR to all of them. And even if it were feasible, it would not be desirable, as UR is not worthwhile or cost-effective for many services. How many services is UR used for, and which ones? This varies by plan, and it depends on a plan’s size, structure, and level of management control. The following factors are taken into account: 
 access requirements,   frequency of utilization,  cost and risk,  total expenditures,  level of inappropriate utilization, and  cost of review. 
Access Requirements 
In all types of health plans, members can directly access their primary care providers (PCPs)—they do not need a referral from anyone or authorization from the plan for an office visit. In most plans members can also directly access certain nonprimary care such as obstetrics/gynecology (OB/GYN), pediatrics, and dental and vision care. Some plans allow a member with a serious chronic condition (such as AIDS, diabetes, advanced rheumatoid arthritis, and congestive heart failure) to select a specialist as her PCP, so that referral or authorization is not required to see the specialist. Some states also require direct access to chiropractics and other forms of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM). For other types of nonprimary care, members may be required to obtain a referral from their PCP or authorization from the plan. 
Frequency of Utilization 
Some services are performed so frequently and consistently that they are considered part of a provider’s normal practice. For example, PCPs routinely have certain laboratory tests done in conjunction with annual physical examinations, OB/GYN specialists routinely order Pap tests as part of a gynecological examination, and cardiologists routinely administer electrocardiograms (EKGs) during regular office visits. Authorization and utilization review is typically not required for these services.  
On the other hand, procedures that are not routine usually require authorization and UR. 
For example, a PCP would typically be free to order X-rays of a member’s broken leg but would have to obtain authorization for an MRI study, and a cardiologist could administer an EKG as part of a regular office visit but would probably need authorization for an echocardiogram. 
Cost and Risk of a Service 
Low-cost, low-risk services generally do not require authorization and UR, while highcost or high-risk procedures and treatments generally do. Authorization is also typically required for services that are not widely accepted as effective, are being proposed before trying less costly or more conservative treatment, or must be performed by a noncontracted provider. 
Total Expenditures on a Service 
In addition to the cost of a service, the total amount the plan spends on that service in a year is an important consideration. A low-cost service can have a high total cost for a plan if it is provided frequently. For instance, physical therapy costs less than many healthcare services, but many members receive it the plan’s total expenditures on it might be considerable, making authorization and UR desirable. 
Level of Inappropriate Utilization 
If authorization is frequently denied for a service, this may be an indication that the service is often used inappropriately. Therefore the higher the denial rate for a service, the more likely the service will require authorization and UR.  
Cost of Review 
UR takes time and resources, and another consideration in deciding whether a service should be subject to UR is whether the savings realized or the improvement in quality of care justify the costs of conducting UR. Plans must periodically review the services covered by their UR programs in terms of value and cost-effectiveness and eliminate unnecessary or ineffective requirements, especially for frequently used services. In many plans most PCP requests for authorization for nonprimary care services are approved, indicating that PCPs are adequately managing utilization of these services, and in this case UR is an unnecessary cost for the plan and an unnecessary administrative burden for PCPs. Many plans also allow specialists to perform certain services without authorization because the cost savings of UR do not outweigh the cost of performing it.  
Care Settings 
One of the primary purposes of both prospective and concurrent UR is to determine the setting of care (level of care) most appropriate for a patient. Acute care facilities such as hospitals are necessary for severe medical problems that require around-the-clock intensive treatment by healthcare professionals. But they are not always appropriate for patients who need immediate evaluation and treatment, which can often be provided more effectively in emergency departments, urgent care centers, and observation care units. And for those recovering from an acute illness or injury, continued care can often be delivered more cost-effectively in alternative settings such as subacute care facilities, step-down units, or patients’ homes, rather than in a hospital. 
Emergency Departments 
Sometimes the immediate diagnosis and treatment of a severe injury or critical illness is needed, and this is usually best provided by an emergency department (ED), such as the emergency room of a hospital. 
On one hand, health plans encourage members to use EDs when necessary, as this can both improve outcomes for the member and reduce the long-term utilization of resources. For example, emergency treatment for a patient suffering a severe asthma attack can often reduce the length of subsequent inpatient care or even eliminate the need for hospitalization.  
On the other hand, a plan can incur high costs when members use EDs unnecessarily or inappropriately, as when a member repeatedly goes to an emergency room when he really should make an appointment with his PCP. In response to this problem, plans often require members or providers to obtain authorization for an ED visit within 24 hours after treatment, and if this is not done benefits may be denied or reduced. Some plans also conduct a retrospective review of ED claims and may deny payment if it is determined that emergency care was not really needed. 
However, some states prohibit health plans from requiring authorization for emergency services. And many states require plans to use the prudent layperson’s standard in determining whether emergency care was appropriate and should be paid for, and most plans have adopted this standard. This means that a condition is considered a legitimate emergency if a prudent layperson (a person with an average knowledge of health and medicine) could reasonably expect the absence of immediate medical attention to put her health in jeopardy. It should be clarified that the prudent layperson’s standard is based on the symptoms that lead a person to seek emergency care, not her eventual diagnosis. For example, it is considered reasonable for a person with severe chest pain to think he may be having a heart attack and go to an ED, even if it turns out to be only severe indigestion. 
Urgent Care Centers 
People with injuries or illnesses that require immediate attention but are not a serious threat to their health or life, such as cuts, sprains, or fevers, may best be treated in an urgent care center. Some centers are located in or near hospital EDs, which refer patients to them, while others are free-standing. Although the cost of care in an urgent care center is generally higher than in a physician’s office, it is lower than in a hospital ED, so many health plans cover it. But other plans do not—they require emergency care to be delivered in an ED and all other care to be coordinated by the member’s PCP. 
Observation Care Units 
Hospital observation care units are for patients who have conditions requiring continuous monitoring but who do not currently need either emergency interventions or acute care. Examples include women with symptoms of pre-term labor, diabetic patients waiting for glucose levels to stabilize following treatment for an acute episode, and people with cardiac irregularities who are waiting for test results. Most patients directed to hospital observation care units have a reasonable chance of stabilizing and being released to a non-acute care setting within 24 hours. Those patients whose conditions do not resolve satisfactorily in the observation unit can be admitted for inpatient care. The facilities, equipment, and staffing requirements for observation care units are much less costly than for emergency departments, so their use can result in lower costs for a health plan. 
Subacute Care Facilities 
Subacute care facilities provide the continuing care needed by people who are too sick to be cared for at home but do not need the intensive treatment and supervision of a hospital. These facilities typically provide 24-hour professional nursing care, physician direction and contact, and extensive ancillary and rehabilitative services (such as physical therapy). The goal is to optimize the patient’s medical condition and functional ability so that she can be sent home or to a lower level of care. 
Step-Down Units 
A step-down unit is a section of a hospital that provides subacute care to patients following a period of acute care. They provide the same services as stand-alone subacute care facilities and are an alternative to them (and are more convenient for physicians and UR nurses). There are also step-down units that provide an intermediate level of care between a critical care unit and a regular nursing unit of a hospital. For example, a heart attack patient who no longer needs the services of a critical care unit but who still needs more monitoring than patients on a regular nursing unit may be transferred to such a step-down unit. Because step-down units use fewer medical resources than higher levels of care, the cost is generally lower. 
Home Healthcare 
Home healthcare is for people who need some nursing care, therapy, or assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs) such as bathing, dressing, and getting around their homes, but who generally do not need 24-hour care. Most of those receiving home healthcare are elderly or disabled people who have an ongoing need for help with ADLs because of a chronic physical impairment or supervision because of a cognitive disorder such as Alzheimer’s disease, and health plans do not cover such care. (Long-term care 

insurance does.) But health plans do cover home healthcare for members who need it for a limited time (such as a few weeks) while they are recovering from an acute illness or injury. Services include basic nursing care, wound care, administering of medications, help with ADLs, and therapy and rehabilitation. Durable medical equipment (such as walkers and wheelchairs) may be provided, and in some cases a nonprofessional home health aide may prepare meals and do housekeeping and laundry. 
Hospice Care 
Hospice care consists of services and support for the dying and their families. The purpose is not primarily to treat the medical condition of the patient, which is incurable, but rather to improve the quality of life for the time that remains. Care focuses on pain and symptom management, social services, and emotional and spiritual support for the individual and family members. Hospice care may be provided in the patient’s home or in a facility. Care is provided by a team that includes nurses, home health aides, social workers, therapists, chaplains, and bereavement counselors. Volunteers are also involved.  
Most health plans that cover hospice care model their coverage on Medicare, specifying that benefits are available only to those who have a life expectancy of six months or less and have agreed to forego medical or surgical interventions that prolong life and receive only healthcare services that support comfort. 
The Authorization/UR Process 
The authorization/utilization review process consists of a series of steps, described below. 
Data Collection 
In prospective review, information is obtained about the member’s condition and the proposed treatment, for use in making the authorization (precertification) decision. 
During concurrent review, information is needed to monitor the member’s progress and treatment and direct him to the best care options. For retrospective UR, a variety of data on utilization, outcomes, and costs are collected. Information and data can be obtained from members, physicians, hospital records, other providers, encounter reports, and claim forms.  
Data Transmittal 
Information for UR may be transmitted to the health plan manually, telephonically, or electronically.  
Manual (Paper) Transmittal 
A provider may complete a paper authorization form and send it to the health plan, and plan employees then enter the information into the computer system. Manual transmittal has a high degree of physician acceptance, as paperwork can generally be completed at the physician’s convenience, without intruding into busy office hours or disrupting patient care. 
Telephone Transmittal 
In telephone transmittal providers call a central number and either speak to a plan employee or report information to an interactive voice response (IVR) system. For doctors, a well-designed telephone system is faster, less cumbersome, and less laborintensive than paper transmittal. But poorly structured systems can result in long delays and unnecessary repetition, especially when telephones are busy or operators put providers on hold. For example, in systems with multiple levels of input, a clerk may ask for demographic information and then transfer the provider to a nurse or physician who collects clinical information. The provider is often put on hold during each transfer. In addition, if information is not carried forward, it must be repeated at each level.  
For the health plan, telephone transmittal is often more accurate and complete than manual transmittal. Providers are less likely to omit necessary information when dealing with a service representative or following instructions on automated systems. Telephone transmittal also reduces data entry errors because data are entered only once (either directly by the provider through an IVR system or by plan personnel). 
Electronic Transmittal 
Electronic systems allow providers to transmit UR information through computers linked to the health plan’s network (intranet) or over the Internet. Electronic transmittal is generally faster, less labor-intensive, and more complete than other transmittal methods, and because it has less opportunity for human error (such as data entry errors), it also tends to be more accurate. However, electronic transmittal of healthcare information is subject to more stringent regulatory requirements than other methods. For example, HIPAA includes extensive guidelines related to electronic transmittal of personal and protected health information. 
Data Evaluation and Decisions 
The data evaluation and decision-making stage of authorization and UR consists of two components, an administrative review and a clinical review.  
Administrative Review 
Administrative review addresses coverage issues: Basically, is the patient covered by the plan, and is the proposed service covered by the patient’s benefit package? If the answer is no, authorization is denied and no further evaluation is necessary. For example, authorization is denied during administrative review if the proposed service is specifically excluded under the benefit plan (for instance, cosmetic surgery or experimental procedures). In some plans administrative review is conducted by employees who are not medical professionals, while in others it is performed by UR staff. 
Medical Review 
If the patient and proposed service are covered, a medical review is conducted—a medical professional (usually a nurse or physician) evaluates the medical necessity and appropriateness of the proposed service. Typically, nurses only have the authority to approve authorization requests that meet certain criteria; the decision to deny authorization based on medical necessity or appropriateness must be made by a physician. Medical review may result in authorization, modified authorization, pended authorization, or denial. 
• If the service is deemed necessary and appropriate, authorization is granted (payment is approved). 
• In some cases UR staff grant modified authorization—they do not approve the service exactly as proposed, but rather with some change. For example, they may approve payment for a wheelchair but require that it be bought from a company contracted with the plan. UR staff may approve an alternative treatment (such as a different drug, provider, or diagnostic test), but only after consulting with the treating physician and reaching consensus on the decision. 
• If UR staff question the necessity or appropriateness of a proposed service, there may be a “pended” authorization—action is delayed while the case is submitted for additional review to the plan’s medical director, UM committee, or expert consultants. Additional information may be requested from the physician. 
• If a service is clearly not medically necessary or appropriate, authorization of payment is denied. However, plans evaluate cases carefully before denying payment, as denials may result in member dissatisfaction, appeals, and even legal action.  
It should be clarified and emphasized again that UR staff do not determine what services a member may receive, only what the health plan will pay for. 
The Scope of Authorizations 
An authorization may vary in terms of the services or time it covers.  
 	Single-visit authorization. Health plans sometimes require PCPs and other gatekeepers to submit a separate authorization request for each specialist visit or nonprimary procedure. Additional visits or services are not covered without an additional authorization. This approach provides a high level of management, but it difficult to implement and enforce, and providers find it onerous.  
 Limited-visit authorization. Under this approach, a single authorization covers a certain number of specialist visits or treatment for a certain amount of time. For visits or services beyond these limits, an additional authorization must be obtained. 
 Prohibition of secondary referrals. In most cases, only a PCP or other gatekeeper can give referrals for nonprimary care; specialists (unless they serve as gatekeepers) cannot make referrals without plan authorization. For example, a PCP refers a member to a specialist for a certain treatment. If the specialist decides the member needs additional visits, different treatment, or the care of a different specialist, the specialist cannot authorize this; PCP must make an additional request for authorization. 
 Inpatient care authorization. For inpatient care in a hospital or other facility, health plans often allow authorization for one service or procedure to cover related services. For example, authorization of a surgical procedure may cover services related to the surgery, such as preoperative testing, radiology, anesthesia, and postoperative follow-up care. In most inpatient situations, extension of an authorization by means of concurrent review is a more efficient and effective way to manage complex cases than requiring a new authorization request.  
Utilization review is based on the individual needs and circumstances of patients, and under each of the above approaches exceptions may be made for conditions that require multiple visits, specialists, or therapy options (such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy, mental health and substance abuse treatment, and obstetrics). In these cases the scope and duration of services are typically determined by the specialist. 
Authorization requirements, including limits and exceptions, should be clearly identified in the health plan’s UM program and communicated to members and providers. 
Notes 
                                                 
1
  W. Clark. 1995. “Negotiating Successful Health Plan Contracts,” Healthcare Financial Management (August 1995): 28. 2  Mark A. Shuster MD, Elizabeth A. McGlynn, and Robert H. Brook MD. 1997. “Why the Quality of U.S. Health Care Must Be Improved,” National Coalition on Health Care, October 1997. 

16 Quality Assessment and Improvement 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• discuss the issue of patient safety, 
• define and give examples of the three main types of quality measures and state the advantages and disadvantages of each, 
• identify the three main categories of data that health plans use to assess quality, and  describe four approaches to improving health plan quality.  
Utilizing healthcare resources efficiently is an important objective of healthcare management, but equally important is ensuring that health plan members receive highquality care and service. In this module we describe how health plans use quality management (QM) to establish goals for quality, measure and monitor performance, and make improvements. In the following module we examine in more detail quality measures, standards, and accreditation. 
We begin with a brief overview of the nature and importance of quality in health plans. We then describe the activities that make up QM. Although QM is a continuous process that consists of a variety of interrelated activities, for the purposes of our discussion we divide it into two broad categories: 
• Quality assessment includes activities designed to define and measure quality and performance and identify any need for change.  
• Quality improvement involves planning and implementing changes and then reapplying quality assessment techniques to assess the impact of those changes on outcomes.  Quality 
What Is Quality? 
Although there is a consensus that quality is an essential goal in healthcare, there are many different ideas about how to define quality, how to recognize it, and how to provide it. In its most general sense, the term quality in the context of a health plan refers to the plan’s success in providing healthcare and other services in such a way that plan members’ needs and expectations are met.  
Two Types of Health Plan Quality 
There are two broad categories of quality in a health plan:  
• Service quality generally refers to a health plan’s success in meeting the needs and expectations of plan members with regard to nonclinical (nonmedical) customer services. It has to do with such matters as how well member services representatives answer member’s questions and resolve administrative issues, how long a member has to wait for a response to a complaint, or how friendly and helpful provider office staff are.  
• Healthcare quality. According to an often quoted definition formulated by the Institute of Medicine, healthcare quality is “the degree to which health services for individuals and populations increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes and are consistent with current professional knowledge.” In common language, healthcare quality refers to whether health plan members receive care based on the most up-to-date and effective medical practices and their medical conditions are successfully cured or managed. 
Why Is Quality Important? 
The mission of a health plan is to provide top-quality healthcare at an affordable price. Therefore, the most straightforward answer to the question, “Why is quality so important for health plans?” is that quality is a major part of a plan’s reason for being. A health plan’s purpose is to, as effectively as possible, maintain and restore members’ health while protecting their safety—in other words, offer quality care. 
There are also good business reasons for a health plan to provide quality and make known that it does so. For many consumers, employers, and other purchasers, quality is an important factor in choosing a health plan, and the ability to demonstrate superior quality gives a health plan a competitive advantage.  
Another issue is that, because managed care plans have been in the forefront of efforts to hold down healthcare costs, some people have expressed concerns that they have compromised on quality. This is not the case, as many studies show that the quality of care provided by managed care plans equals or exceeds that of traditional fee-forservice insurance.1 But health plans may need to demonstrate quality to dispel such doubts and earn the public’s confidence.  
Patient Safety 
One of the most important reasons to promote healthcare quality is to ensure patient safety and reduce healthcare (medical) errors. The National Patient Safety Foundation defines patient safety as “the prevention of healthcare errors and the elimination or mitigation of patient injury caused by healthcare errors”; with a healthcare (medical) error defined as “an unintended healthcare outcome caused by a defect in the delivery of care to a patient.”2 
Research has documented an alarming incidence and severity of medical errors and adverse events (instances of patient harm) caused by them. In 1999 the Institute of Medicine (IOM) published a landmark study that is widely cited; it estimated that nearly 100,000 Americans die in hospitals each year as a result of medical errors.3 More recently (in 2006) IOM issued a report on preventable adverse drug events, which estimated that in one year there were 380,000-450,000 such events in hospitals, 800,000 in long-term care facilities, and 530,000 among outpatient Medicare patients.4  
These large numbers represent people whose physical wellbeing or even lives were put at risk, and who may have undergone unnecessary suffering. It should also be noted that medical errors add to the cost of healthcare, as they can worsen patients’ conditions and lead to the need for additional treatment. The 1999 IOM study estimated the annual cost of medical errors at between $17 and $29 billion.5 
Medical Errors 
What exactly are medical errors? 
• An error of commission is doing the wrong thing. A wrong treatment or procedure is performed, as when the wrong medication is administered.  
• An error of omission is not doing the right thing. A patient does not receive the appropriate test or treatment, or does not receive it in a timely manner.  
• An error of execution is doing the right thing in the wrong way. A planned treatment or procedure is delivered incorrectly, as when a mistake is made in a surgical operation.  
• An adverse event is any harm a patient suffers that is caused by something other than her underlying condition. The cause might be a medical error, some other deficiency in the patient’s care, or something else. 
A federal Quality Interagency Coordination (QuIC) Task Force, expanding on an earlier IOM definition, defined a medical error as: "the failure of a planned action to be completed as intended or the use of a wrong plan to achieve an aim. Errors can include problems in practice, products, procedures, and systems. A useful, brief definition of a medical error is that it is a preventable adverse event.”6 
The Causes of Medical Errors 
Medical errors have a number of causes. In some cases an individual practitioner makes a mistake, but more often there is some breakdown in the healthcare system.  
• Lack of communication. Communication among healthcare providers is often limited or faulty, and this is the cause of many errors. To give a simple but frequent occurrence, doctors often write illegible prescriptions leading to incorrect medications, or illegible orders resulting in inappropriate procedures. Another example: an outpatient diagnostic center fails to call a physician about a patient’s chest x-ray showing pneumonia, and as a result the patient does not receive timely treatment for the pneumonia and has to be hospitalized. The problem of poor communication is compounded by the large numbers of people who may participate in a patient’s care. 

Lack of reporting. Most healthcare organizations have internal systems for reporting such incidents as adverse drug interactions and minor medical errors, and federal law requires that adverse drug reactions be reported to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). But compliance with these requirements is often very low, and incidents frequently go unreported. And without adequate reporting, plans often cannot identify the causes of medical errors or develop effective strategies to prevent them. 
• Lack of verification. Many treatment decisions are based on one individual analysis of test results, without secondary verification, and studies have shown that the error rates in such cases are high. 
One problem that is being addressed is the lack of coordination among parties concerned with medical errors. The National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) and Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank (HIPDB) were established to centralize healthcare quality reporting in relation to practitioners. State licensing agencies, health plans, malpractice insurance carriers, criminal courts, and others are required to report quality of care incidences to these databases, subject to very high fines. The databases also notify practitioners and state licensing entities whenever a report is received about a practitioner, allowing the licensing entity to conduct a further investigation when indicated, as in the case of a criminal conviction or malpractice claim. Health plans may also query these databases when a practitioner’s applies to participate, as can hospitals and medical groups reviewing an application for staff privileges. The national databases have significantly reduced the ability of a poor-quality practitioner to move from one state to another without the new state’s licensing board being aware of prior issues. It has been recommended that an even more comprehensive nationwide mandatory system of collecting, analyzing, and reporting standardized information about medical errors that result in death or serious harm be established, but this has not yet been done. 
Addressing Patient Safety 
Healthcare providers, health plans, and other entities have taken a number of steps to ensure patient safety and reduce medical errors. 
• Medical error reporting systems allow healthcare providers and facilities to analyze common errors and identify aspects of the healthcare delivery process that result in such errors.  
• Medical alert systems apply preprogrammed criteria to identify test results that fall outside acceptable ranges.  
• Drug checking systems link physician and pharmacy order entry information systems and automatically alert physicians and pharmacists of possible drug interactions or allergic reactions to a prescribed drug.  
• Electronic medical record systems allow providers and health plans to track and analyze clinical data and provide reminders for needed services. 
 
Assessing Quality in a Health Plan 
Recognizing that quality is important is easy. But as we will see in this section, it is a more complex task for a health plan to define precisely what quality is in certain contexts and, based on that definition, determine whether the plan is delivering quality. Performance measurement can help a health plan determine how well it is doing in meeting members’ needs and can provide information the plan needs to improve its performance and effectively allocate resources.  
The Issue of Perception  
Plan members’ perceptions of healthcare quality may differ from objective, scientific criteria. 
Example: A health plan contracts with a medical group because the group’s physicians have strong credentials and are recognized as experts in their fields. A plan member visits one of these physicians and feels that she is unfriendly, and the member does not understand her explanation of his illness or her plan for treatment. 
But he undergoes the treatment and gets better. Objectively, based on the provider’s qualifications, the treatment delivered, and the results, the member received highquality care. But he may not think so. 
Consumer perception and medical science may even conflict. 
Example: A member is dissatisfied with her doctor because he refuses to prescribe an antibiotic for her sore throat. But in fact the antibiotic is not necessary or useful for her ailment. Moreover, the overprescribing of antibiotics for viral infections of the throat and respiratory tract has not only increased healthcare expenditures unnecessarily but led to the growth of antibiotic resistant organisms.  
While science and objective criteria take priority, consumer perceptions are also important. They may reflect important aspects of care, such as a doctor’s communication skills. And purchasers base their decisions about health plans in part on the perceptions of the consumers they represent. Consequently, as we will see, while many quality measures are based on scientific criteria, others reflect the perceptions of members.  
Quality Measures  
Measures of quality are generally divided into three categories.  
• Structure measures relate to the nature, quantity, and quality of the resources that a health plan has available for member service and patient care. For instance, a health plan might calculate how many dermatologists it has per 1,000 members, or what percentage of its physicians are board-certified. 
• Process measures relate to the methods and procedures a health plan and its providers use to furnish service and care. A plan might calculate what percentage of members received regular check-ups over a certain period, or how often a certain medication was not prescribed when it should have been. 
Outcomes measures gauge the extent to which services succeed in improving or maintaining patient health. A plan might calculate the percentage of patients with a certain condition who are still alive five years later. 
Most of the measures currently used to evaluate health plan quality are structure and process measures, but the trend is toward greater use of outcomes measures.  
Structure, process, and outcomes are interdependent. Structure and process lead or are believed to lead to better outcomes, and the best structure and process measures are those that can be explicitly linked to improved outcomes. Conversely, outcomes are the results of structure and process, and the most useful outcomes measures are those that can be related to specific processes or structures. If health plans can link outcomes to processes or structures, they will have a better idea of which processes or structures to improve and how to improve them, and can thereby improve patient health outcomes.  
Assessing Service Quality 
As noted, the term “service quality” is used for nonclinical (nonmedical) services. It involves the customer service that health plan members receive both from the plan’s own staff and from its providers.  
Health Plan Staff 
The quality of the service delivered by health plan staff includes: 
• how long a member has to wait for an answer when calling the plan;  the attitude, competence, and efficiency of the member services staff;  how quickly member services representatives can resolve issues for members;  the accuracy and timeliness of claims payments;  the availability and understandability of educational materials for members; and 
• the clarity and accuracy of materials explaining to members benefits, limitations, and administrative processes.  
Health plans can use the three types of measures discussed above to assess service quality. 
• structure measures, such as the number of customer service representatives available; 
• process measures, such as the average wait time when members call or the average claim processing time; and 
• outcomes measures, such as the rate of errors in claims payment or responses to member satisfaction surveys.  
In using these measures, a health plan can compare its performance to established standards and/or its own previous performance. 
Healthcare Providers 
For healthcare providers, service quality includes: 
• how easily members can get through to a doctor’s office by phone;  how long members wait for an appointment;  how long members wait in the office before seeing the doctor;  the attitude, competence, and efficiency of office staff; 
• the doctor’s “bedside manner.” This includes how friendly and understanding the doctor is, how well she explains clinical findings and treatment options, whether the patient feels that she listens to his concerns, etc.). 
Provider service quality can also be assessed by means of structure measures (such as the number of primary care physicians), process measures (average wait time for an appointment), and outcomes measures (results of member surveys). 
Assessing Healthcare Quality  
Healthcare quality typically refers to: 
• patient safety (as defined above); 
• practices consistent with current clinical or scientific knowledge, best practices, and professionally recognized standards of care; and  care delivered in a timely manner to avoid harmful delays; and  care respectful of and responsive to patient needs, preferences, and values. 
Structure Measures 
Structure measures of healthcare quality include: 
• the number of primary care providers in the plan’s network,  the number of specialists,  the number of providers accepting new patients,  the geographic distribution of providers within the service area,   the percentage of providers who are board-certified,  physician turnover in the plan, 
   hospitals in the plan’s network,   the number of hospital beds,   emergency room access, and   the availability of member education programs.  
The advantage of structure measures is that they are relatively easy to calculate and report. The problem with them is that there is little research specifically supporting a link between them and high-quality outcomes. However, it does seem highly probable that many structure measures are related to quality. For instance, other things being equal, a health plan with more board-certified physicians very likely provides higher quality care, on average, than a plan with fewer board-certified physicians. Likewise, it seems clear that if so few doctors are available that members have to wait a very long time for an appointment, healthcare outcomes will be adversely affected. 
Process Measures 
Among the most popular process measures are preventive care statistics. They are relatively easy to calculate and understand, and they fit well with the current emphasis on prevention. Examples include: 
• the percentage of children receiving immunizations; 
• the percentage of adults (particularly the elderly) receiving regular medical checkups;  
• the percentage of members receiving certain screenings, such as mammograms, pap smears, or cholesterol screening; and 
• the percentage of members receiving advice on smoking cessation or other riskreducing programs. 
Health plans also use various process measures related to how providers treat patients. One important element is appropriateness of care—appropriate care can improve health outcomes and increase member satisfaction, while inappropriate care can lead not only to poor outcomes but to adverse events. In general, inappropriate care can be divided into three categories:  
• Overuse of care is unnecessary tests, medications, or procedures. Overuse of care not only wastes resources and increases costs, it can reduce the effectiveness of appropriate treatments and expose the patient to unnecessary risks and possible adverse effects. 
• Underuse of care occurs when a provider fails to render a service or treatment that would likely improve the patient’s health (an error of omission). For example, despite evidence of their benefits, beta blockers are not always routinely administered to patients following a heart attack. 
• Misuse of care occurs when the wrong treatment is provided (an error of commission) or when the correct treatment is delivered incorrectly (an error of execution). 
In many cases appropriate care is codified as professionally recognized standards of care. A standard of care is a diagnostic and treatment process that a provider should follow for a certain type of patient, illness, or clinical circumstance. Standards of care are generally published by medical organizations such as the American Medical Association (AMA) and others. 
The advantage of process measures is the same as for structure measures—they are relatively easy to determine and report. But while links have been established between some process measures and positive health outcomes, for others they have not.  
Outcomes Measures 
Outcomes measures can be divided into three types: clinical status, functional status, and patient perception. 
• Clinical status relates to biological health outcomes, either for an individual or for a population served, such as the following: 
o the change in tumor size for patients treated for cancer, 
o the five-year survival rate for cancer patients (the percentage still living five years after treatment),  
o the occurrence of chest pain in patients who have received coronary angioplasty, o the survival rate of patients receiving coronary angioplasty, 
o the number of hospital admissions for members with certain medical conditions, o the average length of hospital stay by type of injury or illness, o the number of patients contracting an infection in the hospital, 
o the incidence of certain conditions that commonly afflict long-term diabetes patients (such as foot ulcers or blindness), o the occurrence of infants with low birth weight or of premature births, 
o patient safety issues (such as the outcomes of patient falls).  
• Functional status refers to a patient’s ability to perform certain normal activities. Can he go to work? Can he bathe, get dressed, and get around without help? Is his bowel function or sex life impaired? Functional status outcomes measures are commonly used in these areas: 

o stroke rehabilitation (physical, occupational, and speech therapy); o cardiac rehabilitation (following a heart attack or open heart surgery); and o sexual function impairment following surgery or certain drug therapies. 
• Patient perception/satisfaction relates to whether the patient feels an improvement or cured after treatment. (As mentioned above, it should be kept in mind that while patient perception can be valuable and important, it is not an objective measure.) 
These three types of outcomes measures do not always coincide to indicate to providers and patients the best treatment. For example, for a certain type of cancer, Treatment A offer a smaller chance of remission than Treatment B, but on the other hand it impairs the patient’s day-to-day functioning more than Treatment B. In this case clinical status and functional status outcomes measures conflict. 
The advantage of outcomes measures is that they directly gauge the extent to which the ultimate goal of healthcare quality—better patient health—has been achieved. But they also have a number of limitations and problems.  
• Outcomes measures are useful only if they can be linked to structures or processes that a health plan or providers can modify. If no changes can be made that would affect an outcomes measure, it has little value in quality improvement. 
• In some cases data is costly or difficult to obtain. For example, it can take 10 to 20 years to track the outcome of treatment of some slow-growing tumors such as prostate cancer. For complications from diabetes, the delay between treatment and outcome may be as long as 20 to 30 years. 
• To compare outcomes from provider to provider and health plan to health plan, data from different sources must be used, and such data may not be consistent or reliable. There may be differences in the way data was recorded and reported, making it unusable or requiring adjustments. 
• Outcomes often depend on factors that are independent of the quality of care provided and beyond the control of the provider, such as the patient’s gender and age, the severity of his condition, and other illnesses he might have. To compare outcomes fairly among providers, statistical adjustments must be made to account for these factors (called risk adjustment or case-mix adjustment). 
• Outcomes measures have the potential to create undesirable incentives for providers. If outcomes are made public and used to evaluate providers, some providers may be reluctant to treat the sickest patients. Providers are especially likely to adopt this attitude if the outcomes data are not risk-adjusted, or if they believe that the risk-adjustment methods used are inadequate or invalid.  
Note: In this section we have discussed measures of quality in general terms. In the next module we will look at specific performance measures and quality standards and the organizations that sponsor them, including HEDIS and the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) and the new star system for rating Medicare Advantage plans. 
Collecting, Analyzing, and Reporting Quality Assessment Data 
Types of Data 
The data health plans collect for quality assessment can be divided into three categories:  
Financial Data 
Financial data describe the costs of physical, technological, and human resources needed to provide administrative and healthcare services to plan members. Financial data are used to analyze how efficiently health plans and providers use resources. They typically come from the health plan’s claims and encounter reports, its administrative records, and hospital records.  
Clinical Data 
Clinical data include data related both to certain diseases and to general health and functional status. For disease data patient medical records and claims and encounter forms are the primary sources. Information on members’ general health and functional status is collected directly from members using such tools as the SF-36 and HSQ-39 (Health Status Questionnaire) surveys.  
A significant amount of information is available from these sources, but their usefulness is often limited. Poor documentation and multiple sources of information make collecting data from medical records time-consuming and expensive. Information from claims is readily available, but it is limited to diagnostic and treatment codes and costs of services.  
In an effort to make health information attainable more easily and less expensively, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) encourages all types of clinical practitioners and organizations to move toward electronic medical records. HIPAA also addresses the challenges of aggregating claims information by encouraging standardized claim forms and clearinghouses that convert nonstandard forms to standardized forms for more efficient processing and reporting. It should be noted that the U.S. is scheduled to convert to an updated diagnosis coding system (ICD10) in 2013, and this will undoubtedly create additional challenges in diagnostic tracking, trending, and reporting. 
Customer Satisfaction Data 
Customer satisfaction data describe how a health plan’s members, providers, and purchasers view the way the health plan delivers services.  
• Member satisfaction data address both members’ overall satisfaction with the plan and their satisfaction with key factors such as access, quality of care, and administration. Member satisfaction information is typically gathered through telephone or mail surveys. One of the most commonly used surveys is CAHPS®, discussed in the next module. 
• Provider satisfaction data address healthcare providers’ satisfaction with the plan overall and with key factors such as availability of contracted ancillary services (x-ray, labs, durable medical equipment, etc.), the delivery and availability of information regarding best practices, and administration.  
Customer satisfaction data also provide health plans with information about which plan services work best and which services are most important to members, providers, and purchasers.  
Data Analysis 
The analysis of financial, clinical, and customer satisfaction data provides a snapshot of a health plan’s current level of performance. By comparing actual performance to established standards, a health plan can identify areas that need improvement. By comparing current performance against past performance, a plan can identify areas of improvement and of decline. 
Reporting  
The final step in the quality assessment process is reporting results. Performance reports serve two primary purposes, internal and external.  
• Internally, performance reports can be used to help a health plan improve the quality of healthcare and services by identifying the plan’s strengths and weaknesses, giving guidance on where to focus quality improvement efforts.  
• Externally, performance reports provide accountability to the health plan’s customers and outside agencies. By comparing one plan, provider group, or delivery system to another, analysts can use performance reports to identify differences or problems in performance. Health plan customers can use this comparative information to make informed healthcare decisions.  
Quality Improvement 
Quality improvement consists of producing better healthcare outcomes (clinical, functional, and perception/satisfaction). Health plans can accomplish this by changing the structures and processes that underlie their clinical and administrative services. In other words, a health plan can improve its services by increasing or improving its resources and by changing the ways it performs services. For example, a health plan could improve access to care by expanding its provider network (a structure change) or by changing its authorization procedures (a process change).  
Elements of Quality Improvement 
To be effective, changes to structures and processes must include the following elements: 
• Planning. Before taking any action, a health plan must identify where improvement is needed, define desired outcomes, identify causes of problems and barriers to change, and decide what actions are most likely to achieve the desired outcomes. 
• Implementation. Tasks are assigned to departments and individuals, target dates set, activities monitored, and completion tracked. 
• Evaluation. After changes are implemented, outcomes are measured and compared to previous performance and to the goals set. Evaluation is ongoing— repeated measurement and analysis provide a "moving picture" of the quality improvement effort, showing whether it is having a positive effect over time. When goals are not being met, problems or barriers can be identified and changes made or additional actions taken. 
• Communication. The health plan must convey information about its quality improvement efforts and the results through the organization and to its customers. Effective communication helps define and support the plan’s mission, satisfy members’ expectations, improve provider performance, and demonstrate health plan value. 
• Documentation. Accrediting organizations and regulatory bodies require health plans to provide documentation of quality improvement assessment, planning, and evaluation. They also require documentation of the actions planned, responsible parties, and intended completion dates. This provides a written record of the health plan’s activities and their impact on its customers. 
Quality Improvement Approaches 
Health plans use a variety of strategies and tools to improve quality. We will describe some of the most common. 
Benchmarking 
Benchmarking is one of the most effective quality improvement methods. It consists of identifying for a process the best practices that produce the best outcomes and reproducing those practices in an effort to equal or surpass those outcomes.  
Example (improving service quality): A health plan wants to improve member satisfaction with claim resolution. The plan’s managers identify another plan with extremely high customer satisfaction in this area, analyze its practices, and implement them. 
Examples (improving healthcare quality): A health plan identifies a hospital with extremely high survival rates for patients undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery. It uses that hospital’s practices to develop clinical practice guidelines for treating such patients. 
Medical best practices are widely accepted in healthcare professions, so their use by a health plan is generally supported by the plan’s providers.  
Clinical Practice Guidelines 
As noted in our discussion of utilization management, clinical practice guidelines are based on approaches that have been proven to be successful. They are used to help providers consistently deliver services that will improve their patients’ health and reduce unnecessary variations in patient care.  
Clinical practice guidelines can be developed in-house by joint health plan-provider committees. Or they can be obtained from outside sources such as the National Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC), a joint venture of the AMA, the federal Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), and America's Health Insurance Plans 
(AHIP). Other sources are professional associations such as the AMA, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the many associations of medical specialists. Like best practices, clinical practice guidelines are generally accepted and supported by providers. 
Provider Profiling 
Provider profiling involves collecting and analyzing information about the practice patterns of individual providers. It is used during credentialing and recredentialing to determine how well a provider meets a health plan’s standards. Profiling also identifies providers whose practices vary significantly from the norm—they may use substantially more or fewer resources than other providers, or they may use them differently. By analyzing providers’ practice patterns, the health plan can sometimes determine whether an individual’s patterns produce better or worse outcomes and whether they are costeffective. 
Provider profiling can be useful, but it can also be controversial. It is commonly used to educate providers—for instance, a plan might inform a pediatrician that his immunization rates for children are much lower than his peers, and this should encourage him to assess his practices. But some health plans have acted punitively toward providers based solely on utilization rates or have posted such information publicly, and they have found themselves involved in class action lawsuits. As discussed above under outcomes, comparing providers statistically can be complex and difficult, requiring adequate risk adjustment, and consequently it may be difficult to demonstrate that comparisons are valid and fair and defend a punitive or public action. 
Peer Review 
In peer review a panel of medical professionals evaluates the care delivered by a provider. Unlike profiling, peer review is not based primarily on statistics. Peer review can focus on a single episode of care or take a broader look at a provider’s practices. The appropriateness and timeliness of the services delivered are reviewed, as well as outcomes and in some cases patient perceptions (as when a member complaint or negative responses to satisfaction surveys have been received). Results can be used to educate a provider and identify opportunities for improvement or to provide a measure of quality. 
One advantage of peer review is that a physician is likely to more receptive to education and recommendations offered by other physicians than by health plan administrators. And should a health plan have to take disciplinary action against a provider (such as termination of his contract), that action will be easier to defend if it is based on the recommendation of a committee of his peers. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  Landon, Bruce E.; Zaslavsky, Alan M.; Bernard, Shulamit L.; Cioffi, Matthew J.; and Cleary, Paul D. 2004. “Comparison of Performance of Traditional Medicare vs. Medicare Managed Care,” Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), 2004, 291(14):1744-1752. 2  National Patient Safety Foundation. www.npsf.org  
3
  Kohn, Linda T.; Corrigan, Janet M.; and Donaldson, Molla S., editors. 1999. “To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System.” Institute of Medicine. www.iom.edu/reports.  4  Institute of Medicine. 2006. “Preventing Medication Errors” (Quality Chasm Series). 
www.iom.edu/reports.  5  Kohn, Corrigan, and Donaldson. 1999.  
6
 Quoted in the Encyclopedia of Surgery, ”Medical Errors” www.surgeryencyclopedia.com/La-
Pa/Medical-Errors.html 

17 Quality Standards, Accreditation, and Performance Measures 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• define quality standard,  define accreditation,  identify two major accrediting organizations for health plans,   define performance measure, and  list a few of the ways the Affordable Care Act addresses healthcare quality. 
In the last module we described the methods health plans use to measure and improve the quality of administrative and healthcare services delivered to plan members. In this module we describe how quality standards, accreditation, and performance measures help health plans demonstrate the quality of their programs and services to plan members, purchasers, providers, and other external customers. Quality Standards 
Health plans typically rely on standards to assess the quality of the services they provide. Standards are defined by the Institute of Medicine as “authoritative statements of minimum levels of acceptable performance or results, excellent levels of performance or results, or the range of acceptable performance or results.” Standards represent the expectations of the health plan, members, purchasers, and outside agencies for resource utilization, healthcare and administrative processes and procedures, and outcomes. Standards also provide a means of holding health plans, their network providers, and their staffs accountable for providing quality services. 
To qualify as a valid measure of quality and performance, a standard must   relate to conditions that are important to the plan and its enrollees and providers; 
• focus on structures, processes, and/or outcomes that can be influenced through quality improvement initiatives; and   address situations that are controllable by the organization. 
Health plans may use internal or external standards to measure and evaluate the quality of their services.  
• Internal standards are developed by the health plan itself and are based on the organization’s historic performance levels. Health plans generally use internal standards to measure the quality of administrative services, such as customer service, claims processing, etc. 
• External standards are based on outside information, such as published industry-wide averages or benchmarks (sometimes referred to as best practices). Health plans usually use external standards to evaluate healthcare services, such as the rates of childhood immunization or breast cancer screening exams provided to enrollees. Many external standards are developed by accreditation organizations and are used in the accreditation process.  
Accreditation 
Accreditation is an evaluative process in which a healthcare organization undergoes an examination of its operations and processes to determine if they meet designated criteria as defined by the accreditation organization and to ensure that they meet a specified level of quality.1 The accreditation organization (also called the accrediting body) measures plan compliance with standards by means of document review, onsite visits and interviews, medical record review, and the evaluation of member services systems. 
Several organizations provide accreditation for health plans and providers. While there is some overlap, each organization has its own standards. As a result, external customers sometimes have difficulty determining which accrediting body is the most appropriate in a particular case. In this section we will look at two major accreditation organizations for health plans, NCQA and URAC. 
NCQA 
NCQA (the National Committee for Quality Assurance) is a nonprofit organization that accredits health plans, including PPOs, HMOs, POS plans, and others, as well as managed behavioral health organizations (MBHOs), credentials verification organizations (CVOs), disease management (DM) organizations, and physician organizations. More than two-thirds of all health plan members in the U.S. are covered by an NCQA-accredited plan.2 
The Accreditation Process 
NCQA’s accreditation process consists of two parts: an onsite survey of administrative and healthcare services and an offsite evaluation of audited results of selected measures of effectiveness of care and consumer satisfaction included in NCQA’s Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). NCQA uses the CAHPS 4.0H survey, which is a combination of the original HEDIS member satisfaction survey and the CAHPS survey developed by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) to measure consumer satisfaction. The core CAHPS survey questions are administered separately to commercial, Medicare, and Medicaid populations. Onsite evaluations are conducted at least every three years. HEDIS results are evaluated annually. 
Quality Standards 
During the onsite visit evaluators interview health plan staff and review materials to measure the organization’s practices against standards in the following areas related to quality management and improvement and patient care: 
program structure  program operations  health services contracting  availability of practitioners  accessibility of services  member satisfaction  complex case management disease management  
clinical practice guidelines  continuity and coordination of medical care continuity and coordination between medical and behavioral healthcare  standards for medical record documentation  delegation of quality improvement  
In accrediting a health plan, NCQA also reviews processes for utilization management (such as the review and authorization of medical care); credentialing and recredentialing of providers; members’ rights and responsibilities; and member connections (such as innovations in member service, pharmacy benefit, and interactive consumer health tools). In addition, NCQA accreditation standards address consumer protection issues related to internal and external processes for reviewing and evaluating medical appeals. Accreditation standards are updated regularly. 
The Accreditation Decision 
Results of the onsite visit and the HEDIS evaluation are combined and organized into five categories: access and service, qualified providers, staying healthy, getting better, and living with illness. Scores in each of these categories are calculated and used to arrive at an accreditation decision. Health plans can earn one of five accreditation levels: excellent (highest), commendable, accredited, provisional, and denied. The accreditation scores for health plans may total up to 100 points. A maximum of 54.14 points may be awarded based on a health plan's accreditation standards compliance and the remaining 45.86 points are based on the plan's HEDIS and CAHPS results. 
URAC 
URAC is a nonprofit organization that grants accreditation to health plans and health networks. URAC accredits entire organizations based on core standards, and it also has accreditation programs that focus on a single functional area within an organization, including case management, claims processing, comprehensive wellness, consumer education and support, credentialing, disease management, drug therapy management, health website, HIPAA compliance, utilization management, and others. 
The Accreditation Process 
URAC has separate accreditation programs for health plans and health networks, but for both the process consists of a desktop review of plan policies and procedures and an onsite visit to verify the accuracy of the documentation and the plan’s compliance with accreditation standards.  
Quality Standards 
The quality standards used for both plans and networks are fundamentally the same and address three general areas: quality improvement and management structure, organization, and staffing; the nature and scope of the quality management program; and systems for addressing complaints, corrective action, and disciplinary action. In some cases standards apply only to health plans; in other cases the standards are the same for both plans and networks, but the scope is different. For example, credentialing requirements are different for plans than for networks.  
URAC standards consist of components called elements. A “primary element” is one that has a direct and significant impact on the welfare and safety of consumers and patients. A “secondary element” is one that does not have such an impact but is a desirable feature of a high-quality program. URAC does not currently include performance data as part of the overall accreditation process for health plans or health networks, but it is developing such measures for some functional areas. Quality management standards require health plans and networks to engage in quality improvement projects, and URAC allows HEDIS measures to satisfy some of these requirements. 
Performance Measures 
In response to the demand for ways of assessing outcomes, accrediting bodies, government agencies, and commercial organizations have developed performance measures. A performance measure is a quantitative measure of the quality of care provided by a health plan or provider that consumers, payors, regulators, and others can use to compare the plan or provider to other plans or providers.  
HEDIS 
The Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS), administered by NCQA, is a performance measurement tool designed to help healthcare purchasers and consumers compare the quality offered by different health plans. Specified HEDIS measures of effectiveness of care are used as part of NCQA’s accreditation program for health plans. HEDIS 2010 divides performance measures into seven domains: 
• Effectiveness of care—whether plan members receive specific health services during stated time periods and whether the plan meets the needs of sick members and helps well members avoid sickness.  
• Access/availability of care—whether members obtain services in a timely manner without undue burdens or inconvenience. 
• Satisfaction with the experience of care—what current members think about the plan and the care provided (includes CAHPS measures). 
• Use of services—what services a member receives and the utilization of those services.  
• Cost of care—relative resource-use measures for select high-cost, high-volume conditions. 
• Health plan descriptive information—enrollment data, board certification of network providers, and the race/ethnicity and language diversity of members. 
• Health plan stability—the plan’s total membership. 
HEDIS is updated annually to enhance the quality of its evaluations and satisfy consumer demands. For example, HEDIS 2010 added measures for immunizations for adolescents and updated measures for cervical cancer screening and well-child visits. 
Additional Sources of Quality Standards, Performance Measures, and Data  
Information that can be used to improve the quality of healthcare and enhance consumers’ ability to make informed healthcare decisions is also available from commercial sources, government agencies, and professional societies.  
NCQA 
NCQA offers benchmarking information in Quality Compass, a national database of performance and accreditation information submitted by health plans. Performance measures for Quality Compass are drawn from HEDIS and CAHPS. Participation by health plans is voluntary, but many public and private purchasers now require HEDIS reporting, so many plans find it necessary to participate in order to compete effectively for customers. 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) (formerly the Agency for Healthcare Policy and Research) is the primary research arm of the federal Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). In addition to the CAHPS surveys discussed above, AHRQ has initiated a series of projects to develop quality measures and improvement strategies for medical care. For example, the National Quality Measure Clearinghouse (NQMC) is a database and website for information on specific evidencebased healthcare quality measures and measure sets. NQMC builds on AHRQ’s previous initiatives in quality measurement, including the Computerized Needs-Oriented Quality Measurement Evaluation System (CONQUEST), the Expansion of Quality of Care Measures (Q-SPAN) project, the Quality Measurement Network (QMNet) project, and the Performance Measures Inventory (PMI).  
Quality Assessment Performance Improvement (QAPI) 
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) of HHS established the Quality Assessment Performance Improvement (QAPI) program to monitor the quality improvement efforts of Medicare Advantage plans (see below) and health plans providing Medicaid coverage. QAPI establishes specific quality assessment and improvement standards that health plans must meet to remain eligible as Medicare contractors. These standards are voluntary for Medicaid programs. The Affordable Care Act and Quality 
The Affordable Care Act (healthcare reform) promotes healthcare quality improvement in a number of ways. It creates a variety of demonstration projects addressing provider compensation, information collection and analysis, and financial disclosure. It funds research on the comparative effectiveness of various medical treatments. It includes medical malpractice initiatives and makes changes to the Medicare and Medicaid programs intended to improve quality. 
ACA also calls for the development of a national quality improvement strategy to include ways to improve the delivery of healthcare services and patient health outcomes. This initiative involves the creation of processes for the development of quality measures with input from a wide variety of stakeholders, and these quality measures are expected to be used in health plan program reporting and for payment purposes. This “National Quality Strategy” is due to Congress by January 1, 2011.  
ACA and Medicare Advantage 
The most significant changes made by ACA in the area of quality pertain to Medicare Advantage. Medicare Advantage (MA) plans are Medicare-approved private-sector health plans that provide Medicare coverage and some other benefits. Medicare beneficiaries have the option of enrolling in an MA plan instead of traditional Medicare, and many do (currently 24 percent3). (MA plans are described in more detail in a later module.) 
MA plans are paid by the federal government for providing coverage to Medicare beneficiaries. ACA will generally reduce payments to MA plans, but it also gives MA plans the opportunity to obtain higher payments by meeting certain quality criteria. 
MA plans are ranked in a star system: five stars (excellent), four stars (very good), three stars (good), two stars (fair), and one star (poor). Medicare beneficiaries usually have more than one MA plan available to them, and these rankings are designed to help them choose. The rankings are based on HEDIS and CAHPS data and on 33 performance measures in the following areas: 
• preventive care (screenings, tests, and vaccines);  management of chronic conditions;  responsiveness and customer care;  telephone customer service; and  member satisfaction (complaints, appeals, members leaving the plan);  Under ACA the star rankings will affect the amount an MA plan receives from the government in two ways: 
• Rebates. Each MA plan submits a bid to Medicare, offering to provide Medicare coverage for a certain amount per member. Medicare will not pay more than a benchmark amount, which is a percentage of what it costs the government to provide Medicare coverage itself. (Benchmark percentages vary by county based on healthcare costs.) If a plan’s bid is lower than the benchmark, it is allowed to keep a percentage of the difference (a rebate). The plan can use this rebate to provide supplemental benefits to members, lower premiums, or reduce costsharing, making the plan more attractive to potential members. The rebate percentage a plan receives will depend on its ranking: plans with one to three stars will receive 50 percent, those with three-and-a-half or four stars will get 65 percent, and those with four-and-a-half or five will get 70 percent. 
Example: The MA benchmark in a certain county is 105 percent of Medicare costs, and MA Plan A submits a bid based on 95 percent. Plan A has three stars, so it can keep a rebate of 50 percent of the 10 percent difference between its bid and the benchmark, or 5 percent of costs. Plan B also submits a bid of 95 percent, but it has five stars so its rebate is 7 percent (70 percent of the 10 percent difference). 
• Bonuses. MA plans that earn four or more stars will receive bonus payments, to be phased in from 2012 to 2014: 1.5 percent in 2012, 3 percent in 2013, and 5 percent in 2014 and after. Plans in certain counties can receive double bonuses. 
As mentioned, ACA will reduce government payments to MA plans—specifically, benchmark percentages, the maximum Medicare will pay and the basis for rebates, will be gradually lowered. Quality-based payments will present an opportunity for MA plans to make up this loss, but to earn them most MA plans will have to improve quality significantly, as the average plan today has 3.27 stars, and only about a quarter of MA enrollees are in a four or five star plan. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  American Association of Health Plans. March 2000. Guide to Accreditation 1999–2000, p. 83. 2
 NCQA. www.ncqa.org.  
3 The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, “Medicare Advantage 2010 Data Spotlight, Plan Enrollment Patterns and Trends,” June 2010. 

18 Marketing 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 discuss the main considerations in product development,  identify and describe the main distribution channels for health plan products,  define market segmentation and positioning,  discuss the marketing approach to the individual market, and  compare the small, large, and intermediate group markets. 
The marketing of health plan products is a complex process that involves a variety of activities and personnel. In this module we examine the elements of the marketing process, the main health plan market segments, and the approaches used for each segment. 
The Marketing Process 
Marketing involves learning about the needs and wants of potential customers through research, developing products to satisfy those needs and wants, setting prices for these products, making customers aware of their availability and features, and selling them. The last four of these five elements—product, price, promotion, and distribution—are often referred to as the marketing mix. 
For example, a health plan organization conducts market research to find out the needs and preferences of employers and employees. It designs a PPO product with a set of benefits and features that it believes will meet those needs and preferences. It sets a premium rate (a price) that it thinks will be attractive while covering its costs and allowing for a reasonable profit. It develops promotional materials to communicate the availability of the product and the advantages it offers. Finally, the organization works with sales representatives to persuade employers to sponsor the product and employees to enroll in it. 
Research 
Marketing begins with the identification of potential customers and their needs and preferences, through research. Who are a health plan’s potential customers? They are commonly employers who would sponsor a plan and employees who would have the option of enrolling in it. They might include other kinds of group sponsors, such as professional associations. They may be persons who need individual coverage. Or they may be beneficiaries of government programs such as Medicare or Medicaid who have the option of obtaining coverage through a private-sector health plan. 
What does a health plan want to know about its potential customers? It asks these questions: What do employers want in a health plan? What do employees want (which may not be the same thing)? What price are employers and individuals willing to pay? What balance between price and quality are they looking for? 
To find out the answers to these questions, health plans use several marketing research techniques including surveys, interviews, and focus groups. A focus group is a structured but informal meeting of about six to ten people, led by a moderator who asks questions to guide the group in an in-depth discussion of a given topic. Focus groups give marketers insights into consumers’ opinions and attitudes. 
Health plan marketing differs from marketing in many other industries in an important way: The market for health plans is generally local or regional, not national, and the healthcare system and customers’ wants and needs often differ from one place to another. Consequently, although some market data can be obtained nationally, in many cases research must be conducted separately in each market, adding to costs.  
The information that researchers gather has an impact on the four elements of the marketing mix—the products an organization develops, the prices it charges, the advertising and other promotional methods it employs, and the distribution channels it uses. Also, through market research a health plan may discover an unmet need or want that it is able to address. For example, some years ago it was learned that many HMO members were dissatisfied with their lack of provider choice and direct access to specialists, and this led to the development of POS products.  
Product Development 
Product development (or benefit design) is the process of deciding what benefits a product will include and what other features it will have. Product development includes:  
• stipulating the healthcare services that will be covered (and not covered), including deciding whether ancillary items such as prescription drugs and dental and vision care will be included;  stipulating any exclusions or limitations;  setting benefits amounts and levels; 
• setting cost-sharing amounts (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) and any annual limits on the amount members can pay in cost-sharing;  establishing rules for referrals and authorization; 
• deciding how the provider network will be organized and what credentialing criteria will apply; 
• deciding whether out-of-network care will be covered, and if so at what level and with what cost-sharing; and  deciding if any benefits will be carved out and delivered by another organization. 
In making these decisions, a health plan has these objectives:  
• clearly defining what is and is not covered and what benefits will be paid;  
• clearly establishing the responsibilities of members (regarding cost-sharing, referrals, authorization, etc.); 
• promoting both cost-effectiveness and high quality by utilization management and other means; and 
• developing a product that is appealing to potential customers and competitive in the market. 
Product designers must keep the following in mind: 
• Trade-offs. A plan must balance features that will make a product attractive to customers with a price that they will be willing to pay. All customers would like to have a wide range of services covered, easy access to specialists and nonnetwork providers, and low cost-sharing, but are they willing to pay a premium high enough to support such a product? 
• Geography. As noted, customer needs and preferences may differ from one area to another, and a product must be designed to be attractive in the locality where it will be marketed. For instance, a product that would be competitive in a large city might not be in a rural area.  
• Trends. We have seen how changes in customer preferences have led to changes in product design. Product developers must be aware of current and emerging trends and create innovative products to address them.  
There is another important consideration: a product must comply with state and federal regulations. State laws often mandate that HMOs provide comprehensive coverage including prenatal care, various preventive care services, emergency care both in and out of the service area, mental healthcare, and physical, occupational, and speech therapy. There may also be state requirements for PPOs and other plans, although they tend to allow more flexibility. And under the federal Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010, all new health plans will be required to cover a comprehensive set of healthcare services, including preventive and wellness care, prescription drugs, mental healthcare, emergency care and ambulance services, and others. The ACA also restricts other aspects of product design—for instance, it does not allow cost-sharing for preventive care, sets annual limits on cost-sharing, and prohibits annual and lifetime limits on benefits. (The ACA is reviewed in a later module.) 
Successful product development requires the support and input of all functional areas of an organization, including finance (underwriters and actuaries), claims, information systems, provider contracting, utilization management, medical management, customer service, compliance, and sales.  
Many health plan organizations develop products in multiple product lines—for instance, a company might offer an HMO, a PPO, and a POS product. This can enable a company to compete more effectively, especially among large employers who often want their employees to be able to choose among several options. But marketing a diverse collection of products can present challenges. Each product line may need to be promoted and sold in a different way.  Pricing 
Of course, the price of any product is a major factor in its competitiveness, and health plans are no exception—price is in many cases the most important consideration for customers. Therefore, an organization will want to set the price as low as it can. But at the same time, it must exercise great care and planning to ensure that the premium is adequate to cover costs and allow for a reasonable profit. Pricing is discussed in the next module. 
Promotion 
In promotion a business informs potential customers about its products and itself. A health plan lets employers and consumers know what products it offers, how much they cost, and how they can be obtained. It seeks to highlight the advantages of its products and persuade employers to sponsor them and employees to enroll in them (or individuals to buy them). It also promotes itself as an organization and differentiates itself from others—it makes the case that it provides better quality, service, and convenience than its competitors. To help distinguish themselves and their products from others, businesses engage in branding—using a name, design, symbol, etc. to quickly identify a product or organization.  
There are four main promotion tools, together called the promotion mix: 
• Advertising—communication about a product or organization through the mass media that is paid for by the seller (television commercials, newspaper ads, etc.) 
• Publicity—communication through the mass media that provides information about a product or organization but is not paid for. For instance, a health plan might sponsor a community event such as a charity run or hold seminars on health topics that the local news media cover. It might issue a press release to announce its accreditation, and this might be reported as news. 
• Personal selling—person-to-person communication with the goal of selling a product. Typically, sales representatives visit or call potential customers and try to persuade them to buy.  
• Sales promotion—the use of incentives to encourage customers to buy a product or sales representatives to sell it. 
Note that personal selling and sales promotion, while considered elements of the promotion mix, are also distribution, as discussed below. 
Distribution 
Distribution is making products available to those who want to buy them—in other words, selling. Health plans have five main distribution channels: the internal salesforce, agents, brokers, employee benefits consultants, and direct marketing. A health plan may use one channel or another or a combination for a particular product or targeted market segment. 
Most distribution channels involve salespeople of some sort, who communicate directly with customers to try to persuade them to make a purchase. They also serve as a communication link between the health plan and the customer during the sales process and afterwards, answering her questions and helping her deal with the organization. 
The Internal Salesforce 
A plan’s internal salesforce are salespeople who are its employees (as opposed to agents, brokers, and consultants, who are not). This includes sales representatives, support staff, and managers. An internal salesforce may be organized by product lines (HMOs, PPOs, POS plans, etc.), market segments (individuals, large groups, etc.), geographical areas, or in other ways. 
Agents 
An agent is a person authorized by a health plan to act on its behalf to negotiate, sell, and service health plan contracts. Captive agents represent only one health plan; independent agents sell the products of multiple companies. Agents are typically compensated by commission on sales. Most agents sell primarily to the nongroup and small group markets. 
Brokers 
A broker sells and services contracts of multiple health plans (like an independent agent), but he is considered to be acting on behalf of the buyer, not the plan. Brokers review the needs of their clients and recommend the most suitable product at the best price. Most brokers work with groups. Like agents, they are typically compensated by commission. 
Employee Benefits Consultants 
An employee benefits consultant is a specialist hired by employers to advise them on health plan purchases. She evaluates and compares proposed products to determine which is most advantageous for the employer, and for large groups she may solicit proposals from many health plans. Some consultants may also be licensed brokers or agents, but unlike them they are paid by the employer, not the health plan. For this reason some believe that their judgment is more objective.  
Direct Marketing  
In direct marketing (or direct response marketing), a health plan contacts consumers directly, rather than through a salesperson. Direct mail is a common method. Typically, the plan mails material about a product to consumers along with a response card that they can mail back to the plan if they want more information or to be contacted by the plan’s internal salesforce. (Note that in the past consumers might be contacted by telephone, but this is now highly restricted by law.)  
Direct marketing allows a health plan to reach a large number of people quickly and inexpensively, and it can be targeted to a particular population, such as Medicare beneficiaries or people in a locality who do not have group health coverage. Response rates are usually low, but costs are also low compared to other distribution channels.  
Database marketing is related to direct marketing. A database is developed with information on potential customers, including demographic data, information obtained from direct mail surveys, any past contact with the plan, concerns and questions raised by the customer, etc. This allows direct mail campaigns to be more narrowly focused on people who are likely to be interested in the product, resulting in more inquiries and sales. 
Market Segmentation and Positioning 
Market segmentation is the division of the total market for a health plan’s products into smaller and more homogeneous subsets of customers, called market segments. This is necessary because different groups of customers present different marketing challenges and require different approaches. To begin with, the health plan market can be divided into a few broad segments:  
 The group market is the market for group health plans, generally sponsored by employers for their employees (or associations or unions for their members).   The non-group market has three subsets:  
o The individual market—people who need individual health coverage (those who do not have access to a group plan or want to supplement their group coverage in some way); 
o The Medicare market (the senior market)—Medicare beneficiaries 
(mostly elderly people), who can enroll in Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D plans offered by private-sector health plans or buy Medicare supplement insurance policies from private insurers. 
o The Medicaid market—those Medicaid recipients (low-income people) who have the option of enrolling in a private-sector health plan or are required to do so. 
A health plan may break these categories down further into smaller market segments based on a number of variables (such as group size), as discussed below. 
Positioning is choosing a target market segment or niche for a product or organization in relation to the other products or organizations in the marketplace. For example, a health plan might offer a minimal benefit package at a low price to appeal to the small group market. This plan would compete with similarly positioned plans, not with highquality, high-price plans. Or an organization might offer a wide range of health plan products to compete in the large group market with organizations who do likewise.  
The Non-Group Market  
The Individual Market 
The individual market can be divided into two categories: 
• The regular individual market consists of people who, for some reason, are not covered by a group plan. Their employers do not sponsor a plan, or they are not eligible for it, or they choose not to enroll in it. Or they are self-employed, or college students without student group coverage. 
• A separate group is made up of people who had employer-sponsored coverage but have left their jobs and are not (or not yet) eligible for another group plan. These people can often convert their former group coverage to an individual policy.  
Agents and health plans’ internal salesforces are active in the individual market, and advertising and direct mail is also often used.  
The ACA will have an enormous impact on the individual market: 
• Beginning in 2014 all individuals will be required to have health coverage. For those will moderate and low incomes, subsidies (in the form of tax credits) will be available. 
• Health coverage will be marketed to individuals through government-sponsored exchanges, which will provide information to consumers about available health plans and facilitate enrollment.  
• In the exchanges individuals must be offered coverage on a guaranteed issue basis (without medical underwriting, that is, without consideration of current health, medical history, or family medical history). It will no longer be necessary or permitted to require applicants to complete health questionnaires and provide medical information, as is often done currently. 
(Again, the ACA is discussed in more detail in a later module.) 
The Medicare (Senior) Market 
Medicare is a federal healthcare benefits program available to people 65 or older, those with severe, long-term disabilities, and a few others. It is examined in detail in a later module. People eligible for Medicare constitute a market for three types of products offered by private-sector health plans and insurers: 
• Medicare supplement (Medigap) insurance. Traditional Medicare coverage (Medicare Parts A and B) is extensive, but it does not include some healthrelated expenses (such as dental and vision care), and beneficiaries must pay substantial deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments. Beneficiaries can buy Medicare supplement (Medigap) policies from private insurers to cover some cost-sharing and a few noncovered items. 
• Medicare Advantage (MA) plans. Those eligible for Medicare can choose to enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan instead of traditional Medicare. MA plans are private-sector health plans (including HMOs and PPOs) that provide Medicare Part A and B coverage and some additional benefits as well. (Note that Medicare Advantage enrollees do not need and cannot buy Medigap policies.) 
• Medicare Part D prescription drug plans (PDPs). Medicare beneficiaries choose whether they want Part D, a prescription drug program. If they do, they must select and enroll in a private-sector PDP and pay premiums to the PDP. 
(Most MA plans also offer Part D coverage.) 
To protect the elderly, the federal government has strict regulations regarding marketing to the Medicare population. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) must approve all marketing materials, and door-to-door selling and certain other practices are prohibited. 
Health plans use a variety of methods to market to seniors. Television and newspaper advertising are common, as is direct mail. A health plan can obtain mailing lists of seniors from various sources including list clearinghouses and local or national senior organizations. Some plans hold meetings in retirement centers, in which plan representatives offer refreshments and talk about healthcare concerns and the plan’s products. Both agents and a plan’s internal salesforce are typically active in the senior market.  
The Medicaid Market 
Medicaid is a federal-state program that pays for healthcare for low-income people who meet certain criteria. (It is discussed in a later module.) Some states mandate that Medicaid recipients (or certain categories of recipients) receive coverage through a private-sector health plan. 
The Medicaid market is in many ways similar to the Medicare market. Direct mail and meetings are common. And many states have strict regulations designed to protect poor people, who often have little education. States may require preapproval of marketing materials; prohibit giveaways of such things as t-shirts, buttons, balloons, and key chains; and prohibit door-to-door solicitation. 
The Group Market 
The group market is mostly employers sponsoring coverage for their employees. This includes private businesses, state and local governments, and the federal government. But group plans may be sponsored by multi-employer groups, labor unions, and professional and other associations.  
Marketing to groups has two levels. A health plan must first sell the product to the employer, and then, when it is offered to employees, it must persuade them to enroll. Employees of some large companies choose from several products offered by different organizations, so that a plan must convince them that their product is the best.  
The Small Group Market 
A small group is most commonly considered to be one with less than 100 members, but this varies somewhat by health plan. Many small businesses find it difficult to afford health coverage, so they tend to want the cheapest product possible. This often means a basic benefit package, high cost-sharing, and aggressive cost-control (such as no out-ofnetwork coverage and strict referral and authorization policies). In addition, small employers often seek to lock in premium rates for two or three years, and they tend to change plans frequently in their efforts to get the lowest price. 
Some small employers join together to form local alliances to purchase health coverage, often under the sponsorship of the Chamber of Commerce or a small business association. Their combined employee numbers give them the power to negotiate better rates and terms with health plans. Health plans usually treat these purchasing alliances as large groups for marketing purposes. And under the ACA, small employers will be able to obtain coverage through the exchanges.  
Typically, an agent or broker or the health plan’s internal salesforce sells coverage to small groups. Because small businesses normally have no employee benefits staff, they rely heavily on agents and brokers for expertise on health plans. Direct mail is also sometimes used to reach small businesspeople.  
The Large Group Market 
A health plan may consider a large group to be one with 250 or more members, or sometimes 500 or 1,000 is the criterion. The large group market includes both local accounts (employers with employees in only one locality, historically manufacturing companies and city and state governments) and national accounts (employers with employees in different localities covered by a single insurance contract). Unlike small employers, which usually sponsor only one health plan, large businesses often make available to employees a selection of health coverage options, sometimes from several organizations. And because big employers can offer health plans large numbers of potential members, they are in a stronger position than small groups to negotiate favorable rates and terms. 
Large groups are often self-funded (self-insured)—that is, the employer pays healthcare benefits to employees of out its own funds, instead of buying insurance. In this case, a health plan may offer its services as an administrator of the employer’s plan, helping hold down administrative and healthcare costs. Also, some employers with their own health benefits program give employees the option of enrolling in an outside health plan instead. (Self-funded are discussed in the next module.) 
As for small groups, cost is a very important factor, but large groups tend to also give a good deal of weight to other factors, such as healthcare quality, a variety of product line offerings, a high-quality provider network, service, employee satisfaction, and accreditation. For national accounts, network coverage of all regions where employees live is a requirement. Large groups often expect health plans to customize the design of a product to their needs and preferences.  
An large employer’s  decision to buy a health plan is made by the health benefits manager and sometimes also the CEO and chief financial officer. Large employers often use employee benefit consultants, who may request proposals from multiple health plans.  

In marketing a product to employees, the health plan’s sales representatives often work through the employer’s health benefits manager. Typically, employee meetings are held in the workplace; a presentation about the product is made, questions answered, and promotional materials distributed. Large employers may also hold health fairs (often during an annual open enrollment period) in which representatives from all the health plans offered to employees promote their products. A large employer may also use an internal website to inform employees of their health plan options and enroll them. 
The Intermediate Group Market 
Medium-sized or intermediate groups (often defined as 100 to 250 members) are in some ways like small groups and in other ways like large groups. As with small groups, price is often the determining factor, self-funding is not an option, and only one plan is sponsored. But these employers are big enough to have some negotiating power with health plans, and although they cannot require customized products, they can make some demands regarding variations in product design.  
Page 
19 Underwriting, Rating, and Financing  
Objectives 
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:  
• define underwriting and explain how it works,  describe and compare the main rating methods, 
• identify and define key elements of accounting and financial reporting in health plans, and   compare fully funded and self-funded health plans.  
In previous modules we discussed financial arrangements that a health plan makes with its providers, payors, and purchasers. This module examines how a health plan evaluates risk (underwriting), determines the amount to charge for an assumed risk (rating), and manages incoming and outgoing funds (financing). 
Recall from the last module that pricing is one of the factors in the marketing mix. In the context of health plans, pricing is the process of deciding the premium to charge for a health plan or a given set of benefits. It consists of two similar but separate processes: underwriting and rating. 
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) will have a substantial impact on underwriting and rating. However, most provisions of the law in this area will not go into effect until 2014, and many details are being worked out as the law is interpreted and regulations are written and implemented. In this module we describe underwriting and rating as they are conducted now and will be continue to be conducted for the next few years, while also indicating the principal changes that are expected as a result of PPACA.  
Underwriting 
For a health plan to provide appropriate healthcare coverage to individuals or group members at an appropriate price, the company must determine the degree of risk it will be assuming by providing coverage. The process of identifying and classifying the risk represented by an individual or group is called underwriting.  
A health plan cannot assume that each proposed risk is the same. Not all individuals of the same age and sex have the same likelihood of suffering a health-related loss. Nor do all individuals in the same occupation or the same geographic location. In addition, those individuals who believe that they have a greater-than-average likelihood of loss tend to seek healthcare coverage to a greater extent than do those who believe that they have an average or less-than-average likelihood of loss. This tendency is known as antiselection or adverse selection. The task of the underwriter is to analyze each individual or group applying for insurance in order to identify the characteristics that contribute to risk, measure the amount of risk, and determine whether the amount of risk is acceptable.  
Evaluating Risk for Individuals and Groups 
Evaluating the risk represented by a given individual generally begins with an assessment of the typical incidence of illness or injury among individuals of the same age and gender. Using this rate as a reference point, underwriters then consider the effect of risk factors specific to the individual, such as occupation and health status, to identify the amount and type of risk the individual represents.  
Underwriters can find much of this additional information in an underwriting manual prepared by the plan’s actuaries (defined below). An underwriting manual is a document that provides background information about various underwriting impairments and suggests the appropriate action to take if such impairments exist. Underwriting impairments are factors that tend to increase an individual’s risk above that which is normal for her age. In underwriting for individual insurance policies, persons with an average risk of loss are typically classified as standard risks, those with lower-thanaverage risk as preferred risks, and those with higher-than-average risk as substandard or unacceptable risks. 
When evaluating the risk for a group policy, underwriters focus on the risk characteristics of the group as a whole. Group characteristics include the following: 
the reason for the group’s existence, the size of the group,  the flow of new members into the group,  the stability of the group,  the number of eligible group members who will participate in the plan,  the way in which benefit levels will be determined, and  the activities of the group.1 
Because health plans accept all eligible plan members, underwriting for groups focuses primarily on whether the group presents a good distribution of risk—that is, whether the good health of a large number of individuals offsets the higher utilization of healthcare services by unhealthy group members. Although few groups are large enough to provide entirely predictable experience, a health plan generates enough business so that the combination of many groups provides predictability for underwriting purposes. 
Medical Underwriting  
In states where it is not prohibited some health plans may conduct medical underwriting for small groups. Medical underwriting refers to the evaluation of health questionnaires submitted by all proposed plan members to determine the insurability of the group. Based on the underwriting assessment, an underwriter may recommend that group policies include: 
 Waiting periods—periods of time during which insured group members’ medical expenses are not covered. 
 Preexisting conditions provisions—limitations or exclusions of health coverage for conditions that arise before the effective date of coverage. 
 Benefit exclusions—exclusions of health coverage for specified medical conditions. 
The purpose of these policy provisions and exclusions is to enable the health plan to cover the group at a reasonable cost. 
PPACA will have a significant impact on medical underwriting beginning in 2014: 
• Guaranteed issue. For health plans purchased through the new governmentsponsored exchanges and in the individual and small group market, coverage must be offered on a guaranteed issue basis—that is, without consideration of an individual’s current health, medical history, or family medical history. 
• Waiting periods. Employers with 50 or more employees will have to pay a penalty if a waiting period is more than 60 days, and for all employer-sponsored plans waiting periods of more than 90 days will be prohibited. 
• Preexisting conditions. For all health plans, benefits may not be excluded or limited for preexisting conditions (effective for children in 2010).  
Underwriting Requirements  
The primary goal of a health plan’s underwriting function is to accurately assess risk so that the health plan can charge premiums that are adequate to cover its expected costs. That goal, however, must be consistent with the health plan’s marketing goals. A health plan that has very strict underwriting requirements may save money on healthcare costs, but the plan probably will have significantly lower plan enrollment. On the other hand, a health plan with relaxed underwriting may obtain numerous contracts with various groups, but it may experience increased costs because of antiselection. Striking a balance between underwriting standards and marketing goals is critical to a health plan’s success and ultimately its survival. 
Listed below are several types of underwriting requirements, which are requirements that health plans sometimes impose in order to provide healthcare coverage to a given group. Some of these requirements relate to group characteristics, while others relate to financing measures such as cost-sharing (which we have seen before). Together they are designed to balance a health plan’s knowledge of a proposed group with the ability of the group to voluntarily select against the plan (antiselection). Note, however, that a health plan may be prevented from imposing these requirements in certain situations because of regulatory requirements or market demand for guaranteed eligibility, no deductibles or coinsurance, no waiting periods, and no preexisting conditions provisions. 
Common underwriting requirements include the following:2 
• Minimum participation requirements—a percentage of total eligible employees or group members that must enroll in the health plan. 
• Benefit limitations—a maximum number of hospital days or treatments for certain health conditions or a lifetime maximum dollar amount of benefit payments. 
• Deductible—an upfront dollar amount that a plan member must pay for covered healthcare costs before the health plan pays benefits. 
• Coinsurance. After a plan member has satisfied the deductible, the plan pays a percentage of remaining covered healthcare costs (typically 80 percent) and the member is responsible for the rest of costs (typically 20 percent), up to a specified maximum out-of-pocket cost to the plan member. 
• Enrollment restrictions. Members may enroll in a plan only during defined enrollment periods, such as on joining a group as a new employee, during annual open enrollment periods, or at birth (for a dependent of a member). 
• Health statements—statements made by proposed insureds during the medical underwriting process attesting to their good health and insurability. 
PPACA will restrict some underwriting requirements: 
• Lifetime limits on benefits are prohibited as of 2010.  
• Annual limits on benefits are restricted as of 2010 and will be prohibited in 2014. 
• For most health plans there will be limits on the total cost-sharing (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) an insured can be required to pay during a year. 
Renewal Underwriting3 
A health plan typically guarantees a premium rate for a specified period, usually one year. At the end of the initial period, and usually each year thereafter, the health plan’s underwriters reevaluate the contract. Through renewal underwriting underwriters review all the selection factors that were considered when the contract was first issued, then compare the group’s actual utilization rates to those the health plan predicted during its initial underwriting of the group. Based on this, the underwriters determine the group’s renewal rate. At a minimum, renewal underwriting involves a reevaluation of two factors: the group’s experience and the level of participation in the health plan. 
• Experience. A group’s experience is the cost of providing healthcare to the group during a given period of coverage. Changes in this experience can have a significant effect on the premium amount the group is charged for coverage. For example, if a group’s actual experience is greater than its predicted experience, the health plan will most likely increase the group’s premium at renewal to account for these increased costs. 
• Participation. Underwriters verify the degree of employee participation in a plan to ensure that a sufficiently high level of participation exists to reduce the chance of antiselection. In some cases, if the degree of employee participation drops below an acceptable level, an underwriter may require increased participation before renewing the contract. 
Successful renewal underwriting requires that a health plan support a database to track utilization, demographic factors, and other relevant data in order to obtain information on costs per plan member and the amount and frequency of utilization by type of medical benefit.  
Legal Requirements  
State laws define the ways in which health plans can underwrite and price healthcare products. For example, in some states a health plan may increase its price to an employer if the health plan determines that the employer represents a greater risk than that assumed in calculating the base rates. Similarly, the health plan would be able to price the product lower than its base rate if the health plan determines that the employer represents a lower risk than that incorporated into the base rate. 
On the other hand, some states prohibit a health plan from charging more than the base rate listed in its rate manual for specified products or plans, such as HMOs. In such cases, the health plan may be able to decline coverage for a group if the group’s expected risk is greater than that assumed in calculating the base rates. However, some states do not allow HMOs to deny coverage for any group, regardless of a group’s expected risk level, so an HMO’s base rates must reflect this increased risk. 
Rating 
Once a health plan has assessed the risks that an individual or group presents and has identified which risks are acceptable, it can determine the cost of covering those risks. Rating is the process of calculating the appropriate premium to charge purchasers, given the degree of risk represented by the individual or group, the expected costs of delivering medical services, and the expected marketability and competitiveness of the health plan’s plan. A premium is typically a prepaid payment or series of payments made to a health plan by purchasers, and often plan members, for medical benefits. 
The insurance professionals who perform the mathematical analysis necessary for setting insurance premium rates are called actuaries. A health plan’s actuaries are responsible for ensuring that the plan’s operations are conducted on a financially sound basis. The actuaries’ goal, therefore, is to ensure that the premium rates that the health plan charges purchasers are adequate to cover expected plan costs. Premium rates, however, must also be competitive, to encourage a large number of healthy individuals to enroll in the plan. The balance between the actuarial function (ensuring that the plan is financially sound) and the marketing function (ensuring that the plan is marketable) is a critical component of product development. Regular review of its rating method provides a health plan with information on whether the plan is achieving both actuarial and marketing goals. 
Health plans use a variety of rating methods in developing premiums. In this section we will discuss four of the most commonly used methods: community rating, manual rating, experience rating, and blended rating. 
Community Rating 
Community rating is a rating method that sets premiums for financing medical care according to the health plan’s expected costs of providing medical benefits to the community as a whole rather than to any subgroup within the community. Both low-risk and high-risk classes are factored into community rating, which spreads the expected medical care costs across the entire community. If claim costs exceed the premiums received, the plan is financially responsible for the additional costs. 
Community rating is seldom used for large groups, except where required by state law, because other rating methods are more competitive. However, the premium rate obtained by the community rating method is often calculated first as a point of reference for calculating the premium rate under other rating methods. On the other hand, several federal and state initiatives have mandated community rating methods for small groups. Small groups benefit from community rating because they incur less fluctuation in premium rates and more stable health plan contract relationships.  
Standard Community Rating and Tiers 
Under standard community rating (also called pure community rating), a health plan considers only community-wide data and establishes the same financial performance goals for all risk classes. Therefore, the health plan charges all employers or other group sponsors the same dollar amount for a given level of medical benefits or health plan, without adjustments for age, gender, industry, experience, etc. 
Health plans can vary the rates within a single plan, however, by dividing members into tiers (classes) according to the number of individuals covered. No other factors are used to distinguish among the members in each tier. Two-tier arrangements, with an employee-only tier and a family tier (the employee and one or more dependents) are commonly used under all rating methods. Three tiers (employee only, employee and one dependent, and employee and two or more dependents) are also common. Sometimes four or five tiers are used. The premium a plan member pays depends on the tier into which she fits. For instance, in a two-tiered system all members who enroll in Tier 1 (employee only) pay the same monthly premium, which differs from the premium paid by all members who enroll in Tier 2 (family). 
Health plans can also adjust the total premium amount charged to a group to reflect the number of covered members in each tier. For example, if Employer A has four covered members per family contract, the health plan can charge it a higher premium than it charges Employer B, which has 3.5 covered members per family contract. The premium rate applied to each group, however, must be the same. 
Other Community Rating Methods 
In 1991 the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) adopted a Small Group Model Act that allowed health plans to use a modified form of community rating to underwrite small groups. This modification, referred to as community rating by class (CRC), allowed a health plan to divide its members into up to nine rating classes based on demographic factors, industry characteristics, or experience. In this context experience means a specific group’s historical healthcare costs and utilization rates. Each of the rating classes had prescribed minimum and maximum premium rates and all members of the same class or group paid the same premium. The average premium in each class could not be more than 120 percent of the average premium for any other class. 
A 1995 amendment to the NAIC Small Group Model Act eliminated the class rating rules and required plans to use adjusted community rating. In the context of small group coverage, adjusted community rating (ACR), also called modified community rating, is a rating method under which a health plan divides its members into classes or groups based on demographic factors such as geography, family composition, and age, and then charges all members of a class or group the same premium. The plan cannot consider the experience of a class, group, or tier in developing premium rates. The 1995 amendment, however, did not require states to change existing laws. Laws based on the 1991 Model Act that allowed rating classes based on experience factors still exist in many states. 
Manual Rating 
When an underwriter has no recorded or reliable claim experience for a group, she typically uses manual rating to establish the group’s premium. Manual rating is a rating method under which a health plan uses the plan’s average experience with all groups (and sometimes the experience of other health plans), rather than a particular group’s experience, to calculate the group’s premium. Manual rates are sometimes called book rates because a health plan often lists them in a rate book, underwriting manual, or rate manual. 
Health plans often use manual rates to set premiums for groups that have had no previous health coverage. Underwriters also use the manual rate as a starting point when using other rating methods. 
Experience Rating 
Underwriters typically use experience rating to calculate the premiums for groups that have a credible claim history. Experience rating is a rating method under which a health plan analyzes a group’s recorded healthcare costs by type and calculates the group’s premium based partly or completely on the group’s experience. Under experience rating, a health plan charges lower premiums to groups that have experienced low utilization of healthcare services and higher premiums to groups that have experienced high utilization. Because a group’s experience changes over time, a health plan typically uses at least two years of a group’s experience to calculate experience rates. 
In most cases the size of the group is important in determining the degree to which experience rating applies. Health plans typically experience-rate large groups. Note that the definition of what constitutes a large group varies among health plans. A health plan may define a large group as consisting of anywhere from 50 to 1,000 members. 
However, most health plans experience-rate groups that have 1,000 or more members.  
Experience rating methods include prospective experience rating and retrospective experience rating:  
• Under prospective experience rating, a health plan uses a group’s past experience to estimate the group’s expected experience for the next period. Premium rates are calculated according to this expected experience. If the group’s actual experience during the rating period is different than expected, the health plan absorbs the gains or losses. Twelve months is a typical prospective experience rating period for primary care; shorter rating periods may be use for specialty services such as vision care and dental care. 
• Under retrospective experience rating, a health plan looks back at the end of a rating period and evaluates the gains and losses experienced by a group during that period. If the group’s experience during the period is better than expected, the health plan refunds part of the group’s premium in the form of an experience rating dividend. If the group’s experience during the rating period is worse than expected, the health plan charges the group for the excess costs, either in a lump sum or in future premium increases. Federally qualified HMOs cannot use retrospective experience rating. 
Health plans sometimes also experience-rate small groups by underwriting a number of small groups as if they constituted one large group and then evaluating the experience of the entire large group. This practice is known as pooling. The purpose of pooling is to allow small groups to take advantage of the lower premium rates often available to large groups. 
Blended Rating  
For groups that have some, but not extensive, recorded claim experience, health plans often use blended rating. Under blended rating a health plan forecasts a group’s cost of benefits based partly on the health plan’s manual rates and partly on the group’s experience.  
The amount of weight the health plan gives to the manual and experience rates depends on the credibility of the group’s experience. Credibility is a measure of the statistical predictability of a group’s experience. Typically, a health plan assigns a credibility factor—usually expressed as a percentage or a decimal between 0 and 1—to a group’s experience rating. This credibility factor represents the degree to which the health plan has estimated that the available experience data accurately represent the group’s risk. The experience of a large group is generally more credible than that of a small group. 
To calculate a blended rate, the health plan multiplies the group’s experience rate by the group’s credibility and multiplies the applicable manual rate by 1 minus the group’s credibility. The sum of these two calculations is the blended rate.  
Example: A group’s manual rate is $130 per member per month. Its experience rate is $115 per member per month. The credibility factor is 70 percent (0.70). The experience rate is multiplied by the credibility factor ($115 X 0.70 = $80.50). The manual rate is multiplied by 1 minus the credibility factor ($130 X 0.30 = $39). The two dollar figures are added, yielding a blended rate of $119.50, less than the manual rate but somewhat higher than the experience rate. 
Legal Requirements 
Federal or state laws may require that health plans use a particular rating method in determining premium rates. In some cases regulation depends on plan structure. For example, amendments to the HMO Act of 1973 permit federally qualified HMOs to use community rating, community rating by class, or adjusted community rating, but not retrospective experience rating, in determining premium rates for health plans. State requirements may define the specific community rating method that federally qualified HMOs may use. Federally qualified HMOs must obtain approval for using adjusted community rating, and they cannot charge more than 110 percent of the rate charged under pure community rating to groups with 100 or fewer members. 
Individual states also establish requirements for HMOs that are not federally qualified and for other health plans. The rating methods that non-qualified HMOs, preferred provider organizations (PPOs), and point-of-service (POS) option plans use are similar to those used for indemnity plans and are usually subject to state insurance regulations. Federally qualified HMOs that offer a POS option must comply with federal requirements for rating the HMO and state requirements for rating the POS option. 
In other cases regulation is based on the specific population or group served. Some states require all health plans to use community rating for individuals and small groups. 
Other states require community rating for individuals and all groups, regardless of size. A health plan that pursues government contracts must use rating methods that are permitted under federal law. For example, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) require all health plans that assume Medicare risk to use adjusted community rating. Also, to obtain contracts for the Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) program, a health plan cannot charge the federal government more than it charges other groups of a similar size. State and county requirements establish Medicaid reimbursement rates and limit rate setting to a specified maximum percentage of provider fees. (We discuss government healthcare benefits programs toward the end of the course.) 
In addition to specifying the rates health plans can charge small groups, the NAIC’s Small Group Model Act limits the rate spread, which is the difference between the highest and lowest rates that a health plan charges small groups, to a ratio of two to one. For instance, if the lowest rate that an HMO charges a small group is $62.50, the highest rate it charges for the same set of medical benefits cannot be greater than $125. Forty states have enacted laws that are variations of the NAIC’s Small Group Model Act. 
A health plan may be required to file yearly reports outlining the rating method used to establish premium rates with the insurance department in each state in which it conducts business. Any changes made to the rating method or rate schedule must also be submitted for regulatory approval. 
PPACA will also have an impact on rating. As of 2014, there will be limits on differences in rates charged different individuals. Such differences may be based only on age, geographical area, family size, and tobacco use. In age-based rating the highest rate cannot be more than three times the lowest rate, and a higher rate imposed for tobacco use can be no more than 150 percent of the standard rate. 
 

Financial Management 
For most health plans financing includes financial management and plan funding. In this section we discuss financial management, which is the process of managing a health plan’s financial resources, including management decisions concerning accounting and financial reporting, forecasting, and budgeting. We examine plan funding in the next section. 
Laws and Regulations 
Health plans must comply with accounting standards and financial reporting requirements established by law or regulation. For example, public corporations must publish an annual report and must file corporate income tax returns on a timely basis. A company’s annual report must include audited financial statements, including a balance sheet, income statement, cash flow statement, and statement of stockholders’ equity, among other financial data. 
As noted in an earlier module, some HMOs and other health plans may have to comply with financial reporting requirements established by state insurance regulators. Sometimes a large health plan may consist of one or more subsidiaries or other legal entities that are subject to state insurance regulations even if the health plan is not. 
Some health plans may have to file an annual statement with the NAIC and the insurance regulatory body in each state in which they conduct business. The annual statement consists of numerous financial statements, exhibits, and schedules. In addition to the above financial reporting requirements, health plans that are for-profit public corporations must be concerned with meeting stockholder expectations about corporate earnings, profits, and stock price.  
Key Elements of Accounting and Financial Reporting4 
Two major accounts—revenues and expenses—appear on an MCO’s income statement, which is the financial statement that summarizes an MCO’s revenue and expense activity during a specified period. Also included in the income statement is net income, also call profit, which is the excess of total revenues over total expenses. If total expenses exceed total revenues, the result is a net loss. 
• Revenues are the amounts earned from a company’s sales of products and services to its customers. Typical revenues for an MCO include premiums and fees generated from plan members and group sponsors (generally employers) and the interest earned on premiums and fees. Premiums comprise the greatest percentage of a health plan’s revenues. 
• Expenses are the amounts spent or committed to pay for covered benefits and their administration. Typical expenses for an MCO include administrative expenses, stop-loss insurance premiums, provider reimbursement costs, and plan utilization costs. Administrative expenses include marketing and selling costs, salaries of health plan employees, advertising, and benefits administration. Provider reimbursement costs include physician salaries or capitation payments and hospital and ancillary service provider fees. 
Three major account categories—assets, liabilities, and capital—appear on an MCO’s balance sheet, which is the financial statement that shows an MCO’s financial status on a specified date.  
• Assets are all items of value that a company owns. Typical assets for an MCO include invested assets, cash and cash equivalents, and receivables, which are dollar amounts expected from outstanding (not yet received) health plan premiums and copayments. 
• Liabilities are all debts and obligations of a company. The most significant liabilities for health insurance companies are its reserves, which are estimates of money that an insurer needs in order to pay future business obligations. Reserves include incurred but not reported (IBNR) claims, which are claims or benefits that occurred during a particular time period but that have not yet been reported or submitted to an insurer or MCO and so have not yet been paid.  
• Capital in this context is the money that a public company’s owners have invested in the company. 
Surplus is the amount that remains when an insurer subtracts its liabilities and capital from its assets. 
Statutory Solvency 
State insurance regulators are primarily concerned with an HMO’s statutory solvency, which is its ability to maintain at least the minimum amount of capital and surplus specified by state insurance regulators. Individual states establish the minimum capital and surplus requirements necessary for an HMO to conduct business. Under the NAIC’s HMO Model Act, which many states have adopted, an HMO must maintain at least $1 million in capital to remain in business. Additional capital requirements in the HMO Model Act require HMOs to maintain specified percentages of their annual premiums and expected healthcare expenses. 
Internal Reporting 
In addition to external financial reporting requirements, the financial management function of a health plan compiles internal management reports and statements that enable health plan managers to monitor financial performance. Forecasting and budgeting are examples of internal management reporting methods. 
• Forecasting is a process that involves predicting an MCO’s incoming and outgoing cash flows—primarily revenues and expenses—and predicting the values of its assets, liabilities, and capital or capital and surplus. The purpose of forecasting is to provide information than an MCO may use to ensure its future financial strength and profitability. Typically, a company develops a detailed forecast for each product or line of business.  
• Budgeting is a process that includes creating a financial plan of action that an organization believes will help it achieve its goals, given the organization’s forecast. Through budgeting, an MCO may establish dollar projections for its revenue and expense targets for its ongoing operations. Throughout the year the budgeting process provides the MCO with timely reports that enable it to monitor variances between expected and actual revenues and expenses. Variances are the difference obtained from subtracting actual results for expected (budgeted) results. 
Comparing the amounts in the expected budget with those in the actual budget provides a variance for each budgeted item. Most health plans monitor variances on a monthly or more frequent basis. Analyzing the source of the variances provides management with the information it needs to make rating decisions and adjust the budget accordingly.  
Typically, a health plan analyzes its variances for medical expenses by type, such as primary care, specialty care, inpatient hospitalization, pharmacy benefits, and so on. Alternatively, a health plan may analyze its variances by population and by health plan. For example, a health plan may not only separately analyze variances for primary care expenses for large employer groups, Medicare populations, and Medicaid populations, but also according to type of plan, such as HMO, PPO, and HMO with a POS option. 
A financial manager uses variances to refine the budget for the next period. Analyzing variances also enables managers to monitor and evaluate a health plan’s overall financial performance. Large variances between expected and actual revenues or expenses usually result in revised budgets or operational changes. For example, significant increases in expenses for specialty care may result in a revision to the incentive plan for PCPs to decrease specialist referrals. 
Another critical factor in a health plan’s survival and success is the health plan’s ability to manage its flow of funds (money). Fund inflows primarily include revenues and fund outflows generally include expenses. Therefore, accounting for revenues and expenses on a timely basis is critical to monitoring the flow of funds in any organization. A health plan must make strategic and operational decisions to ensure a positive flow of funds, which means that the health plan’s funds inflows are greater than its funds outflows. 
  
Plan Funding 
Plan funding is the method that an employer or other payor or purchaser uses to pay medical benefit costs and administrative expenses. A health plan may be financed or funded in a variety of ways, subject to federal and state requirements. In this section we describe two common types of plans: fully funded plans and self-funded plans. We also briefly discuss third party administrators. 
Fully Funded Plans 
In a fully funded plan an insurer or health plan bears the responsibility of guaranteeing claim payments, paying for all incurred covered benefits, and administering the health plan. If the dollar amount of claims or administrative expenses exceeds the dollar amount of premiums collected, the health plan or insurer is responsible for the difference. On the other hand, if the group has fewer claim expenses than anticipated, the health plan or insurer has an opportunity to make a profit that is greater than anticipated. A fully funded plan is the traditional funding arrangement for a group health plan. The group’s policyholder, typically an employer, makes monthly premium payments to the health plan. 
Self-Funded Plans  
In a self-funded plan (also called a self-insured plan), an employer or other group sponsor, rather than a health plan or insurance company, is financially responsible for paying plan expenses, including claims made by group plan members. The group sponsor, typically a large employer or group of employers, assumes complete financial responsibility for the incurred covered benefits and related expenses. A group may be partially or fully self-funded. Under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), a self-funded plan is exempt from specified state insurance regulations. 
In a self-funded plan, the money that an employer and employees would have paid in premiums to an insurer or health plan is deposited into an account, called the funding vehicle, until the money is paid out. Employers pay only for incurred healthcare costs in a self-funded plan, so they save money when employees’ utilization of medical care is lower than expected. However, employers are responsible for all incurred claims and other expenses, even if the funded amount is exhausted. 
Stop-Loss Insurance 
If a self-funded group experiences catastrophic medical claims or actual utilization is significantly greater than expected during a year, the employer might not have the financial resources to pay all the claims. For this reason, many self-funded employers choose to purchase stop-loss insurance, which enables them to place a dollar limit on their liability for paying claims. Stop-loss insurance can be purchased in several forms. 
• Individual stop-loss coverage (or specific stop-loss coverage) provides benefits for claims on an individual that exceed a stated amount in a given period.  
• Aggregate stop-loss coverage provides benefits when the group’s total claims during a specified period exceed a stated amount. Under the terms of the stoploss contract, the employer pays all incurred healthcare costs up to the amount specified in the contract out of its own funds.  
The stop-loss carrier assumes financial responsibility for all costs in excess of the specified amount. The stop-loss carrier does not make benefit payments directly to the insured group members; instead, the carrier reimburses the employer, which retains responsibility for making claim payments. 
Administration 
In a fully funded plan the insurer or health plan usually handles both the administrative and claims paying functions. But in a self-funded plan an employer or group sponsor must decide whether to perform the administrative duties on its own. An employer has several options in plan administration. 
The employer may self-pay, which means that the employer administers the plan itself by hiring a staff and purchasing the appropriate information management systems. 
Alternatively, the employer may hire an independent third party to administer the plan. A third-party administrator (TPA) is an organization that administers group benefit plans for self-funded groups, but that does not have the financial responsibility for paying benefits. The employer retains the financial responsibility for paying claims for the selffunded group. 
Examples of administrative services that TPAs provide to self-funded groups include claims administration and membership services. A TPA may also offer advice to clients on the purchase and design of employee benefits programs. The contract between an employer and an insurer or other TPA is called an administrative services only (ASO) contract. Third-party administrators are usually paid a fixed fee per employee for administering the terms of the ASO contract. 
Conclusion 
In this module we have learned about three important health plan functions: 
• In underwriting a health plan assesses the risk it will assume by providing coverage to an individual or group. The underwriter identifies factors that contribute to risk, estimates the amount of risk, and determines whether the risk is acceptable. 
• In rating a health plan calculates the premium it should charge an individual or group for coverage. The amount is based on the risk presented by the individual or group, the expected cost of medical services, and marketability and competitiveness.  
• In financial management a health plan’s monetary resources are administered, monitored, and coordinated. This includes accounting, reporting, forecasting, and budgeting. 
We also examined plan funding—how an employer pays for employee healthcare benefits and related administrative expenses. An employer-sponsored health plan may be fully funded, with claims and administrative costs and liability borne by a health plan or insurance company, or self-funded (self-insured), with the employer bearing those costs and liability.  
Notes 
                                                 
1  Harriett E. Jones and Dani L. Long, Principles of Insurance: Life, Health, and Annuities, 2nd ed. (LOMA ), 1999. 2  Adapted from Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, Pricing and Financing the Product, 1992. Used with permission, all rights reserved. 3
  Adapted from Gene Stone, Insurance Company Operations (LOMA), 2000. Used with permission; all rights reserved. 4  Adapted from Elizabeth A. Mulligan and Gene Stone, Accounting and Financial Reporting in Life and Health Insurance Companies (LOMA), 1997. Used with permission, all rights reserved. 

20 Information Management  
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• describe the kinds of information and information system capabilities needed by health plans,  discuss some of the main challenges in managing information, and  
• describe the use by health plans of information technologies, including ebusiness and e-commerce, electronic data interchange (EDI), business intelligence (BI) and decision support systems (DSSs), data warehouses, electronic medical records, networks, and personal health records (PHRs) and electronic health records (EHRs). 
In this module we explore health plans’ needs for information and information management capabilities. We discuss challenges involved in data management and describe some of the ways health plans can use information technology to help them operate effectively and efficiently. 
Information Management Needs 
Having current, correct information available to the right person at the right time in the right format is critical to the success of health plan operations. Therefore, a health plan needs an accurate, efficient method of information and data management. Information management is the combination of systems, processes, and technology that a health plan uses to provide its employees with the information they need to carry out their job responsibilities and to provide plan members, providers, purchasers, and other companies and organizations with the information they need to do business with and otherwise interact with the plan. 
Other important purposes of information management are to ensure the security of health plan information— that is, to see that only authorized parties have access to it— and to facilitate the exchange of information. Health plans need capabilities for information exchange among internal functions and with external entities. For example, quality management program directors need member satisfaction information from member services to include in reports to external parties such as purchasers, providers, members, regulatory agencies, and accrediting bodies. The accounting department needs information from network management and claims to correctly reimburse providers for healthcare services delivered to members. 
Common information needed by health plan personnel include the following: 
• descriptions of benefit structures of the health plan’s products,  member eligibility rosters,  current information about network providers, 
• reimbursement arrangements with participating providers,  information to support the authorization process,  reports on utilization and quality management programs,  information on member and provider satisfaction with the health plan,  information on claims and claims processing,  premium billing and payment information for various purchasers, 
• the results of performance measurements for various health plan departments, and  financial information for accounting and financial reporting purposes. 
Needs for Information System Capabilities  
An information system is an interactive combination of people, computer hardware and software, communication devices, and procedures designed to provide a continuous flow of information to the people who need it to make decisions or perform activities. Health plans have three basic types of information systems: 
• systems to assist plan personnel with day-to-day operations and transactions (such as processing claims or billing purchasers for premium payments); 
• systems to support the analysis of accumulated data and information and to report the results of that analysis (for instance, preparing periodic financial statements or evaluating preventive care, case management, or disease management programs); and  
• systems to support electronic transactions and information-sharing between itself and others—members, providers, and other individuals and organizations that work with the plan. 
In addition to general transaction and reporting systems, plan managers typically need some or all of the following specialized system capabilities to support various activities in the organization: 
• Credentialing. Plan managers need to obtain and review the documentation of healthcare professionals and institutional providers, including licensure, certifications, facility privileges, evidence of malpractice insurance, malpractice history, etc. A credentialing system tracks provider credentials and generates notices of the need for recredentialing, based on license expiration dates, the date on which the provider’s credentials were last reviewed, continuing education requirements, etc. 
• Contract management for health plans can be complex, particularly under capitation. If a health plan is unable to track costs and patient encounters and treatment accurately, it will be unable to reconcile capitation payments and manage risk pools, and if it is unable to monitor eligibility, it runs the risk of paying benefits for ineligible people. Factors that often affect members’ eligibility status are changes in employment, changes in marital status, or coverage under more than one plan. A contract management system incorporates membership data and provider reimbursement arrangements and analyzes transactions according to contract rules. It may also include features such as decision support, modeling and forecasting, cost reporting, and contract compliance tracking. 
• Utilization management. Health plans and providers need information systems for managing authorization transactions and utilization. In a health plan environment, pre-established guidelines determine which services require authorization of payment from the health plan. Automated systems incorporating authorization requirements can facilitate the processing of requests for authorization. To monitor the actual use and costs of care, health plans require systems that track the utilization of services by type of service and provider. Many health plans also want systems specifically designed to manage access, utilization, and quality of care under case management or disease management programs. 
• Quality management. Positive outcomes of treatment and lower incidence of illness define value to customers. To compare plans and make a purchase decisions, customers need information about providers, treatment options, care outcomes, and plan performance. Health plans need information systems that can store, analyze, and report on large amounts of clinically significant data over time to support the development of quality indicators, outcome measures, and clinical protocols and guidelines. 
• Provider profiling is critical to managing the quality and cost of the care provided by network providers. Profiling helps a health plan detect overutilization, underutilization, and inappropriate utilization of medical resources. Managers need systems that enable them to identify those providers whose costs of care or whose treatment patterns deviate significantly from the norm. 
• Enterprise scheduling. In large healthcare organizations (particularly providerbased health plans and staff model HMOs), there is a need to manage the use of services and resources such as MRI equipment and surgery centers. An enterprise scheduling system permits physician groups, hospitals, and other facilities within an enterprise to function as a single organization in arranging access to facilities and resources. 
• Claims processing depends on the accumulation and analysis of a vast amount of information about plan members, providers, compensation arrangements, fee schedules for specific types of services, authorization requirements, and plan structure and benefits. The information gathered by the claims department is also used by other functional areas within the health plan, including member services, marketing, finance, medical management, contracting, and provider relations. Health plans must ensure that the information collected and disbursed by its claims administration process is accurate, complete, and up-to-date. 
• Marketing. The ability to communicate information about plan membership, benefits, and services is critical to the survival of a health plan. Health plans need to convey information to purchasers and members (both current and potential) concerning plan performance and effectiveness. Often, employers offer employees a choice of health plans, and it is easier to make this choice when there are common measures of plan performance in place. Health plan marketing departments also need information about current customers, potential customers, competing health plans, and sales force activities to plan and implement their marketing strategies. 
• Member Services. Health plans need information systems that make access to information, transaction processing, and other types of services fast and convenient for members. Such systems typically incorporate data management with communications systems. Members should be able to access information about claims, the health plan and its programs, and health and wellness through online portals. 
• Sales. To facilitate sales through brokers or direct channels, plans need systems that automate quoting, contracting, and enrollment functions. These systems may be stand-alone e-commerce systems (see below), or they may provide information to other entities for incorporation into their e-commerce systems. Under healthcare reform (discussed in a later module), information will have to be supplied to exchanges through which many people will buy health coverage. 
• Finances. From the general ledger to accounts payable and procurement systems, health plans see the pass-through of very large sums of money, as premiums come in and medical claims are paid. Financial systems must account for all payments as well as for financial assets and reserves. 
Challenges in Managing Information and Data  
In effectively managing information and data, health plans face several significant challenges. 
• A high volume of data from multiple sources. A health plan must be able to manage a large volume of data from both internal and external sources. A plan generates tremendous amounts of internal data including documentation of its business operations and detailed records of the services it delivers to purchasers, providers, and plan members. Providers generate additional data in the course of treating members. The plan also receives external data from purchasers who maintain records on plan members and from a wide variety of state and federal agencies. 
• Different types of data. Providers generate clinical data related to healthcare services and outcomes. Regulators and accrediting agencies provide operational information about legal requirements and quality standards. The health plan generates provider and member satisfaction data and financial data related to revenues and expenses. The health plan must be able to understand all of these types of data and the relationships between them. 
• Quality of data. Health plans often experience difficulties acquiring data that is complete, accurate, and consistent from one source to another. Medical management, network management, and claims processing activities frequently rely on coded information submitted by providers, such as codes for a member’s diagnosis and the healthcare services delivered to her. However, the coded information does not always provide enough detail for the health plan to process the transactions associated with those services. For example, if the coded information is incomplete, the health plan may not be able to evaluate provider or health plan performance or to process requests for authorization of payment, provider reimbursements, and payments of claims. Inaccuracies in data often result from provider or health plan staff errors made while inputting the diagnostic and procedural codes. Inconsistencies arise because different providers sometimes use different diagnostic codes for similar types of patients or different procedural codes for the same procedure. 
• Usability of data. The data that is readily available and easy to collect may not be the most relevant for the health plan’s transaction processing or reporting needs. The health plan may need to manipulate the data or process it through additional analytic tools before it is meaningful for plan operations. 
• Different formats. A health plan must be able to manage different data formats. Data from providers and plan members is frequently in paper documents. Much of the data generated by a health plan is in electronic form, but it is often distributed in separate databases, such as a provider database, a member database, and a claims database, each of which may have different organizational structures and use different software. In many cases, the approach to information management varies among different programs within the same health plan function. The lack of coordination and compatibility among information management processes typically result in higher costs and less efficiency.  
• Reporting requirements. A health plan’s information management systems must be able to produce many different types of reports on different schedules. Report needs vary according to the nature of the function, the activities included in the function, the level of detail desired, and the type of analysis that has been performed on the data. For example, case management staff may need to examine the complete set of data about the patient cases they are managing, while the case management program director needs a concise summary of current case data along with notations of trends or problems. Ideally, the information management system can produce reports in the frequency, format, and level of detail appropriate for each report user’s purposes. Although information users typically need information rather than raw data, on occasion they may need access to the data as well. 
• Security and privacy. The security and privacy of sensitive medical information is of special concern for health plans, members, providers, and purchasers alike. In accordance with HIPAA, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has established federal regulations to protect the confidentiality and security of members’ medical information (as discussed in a later module). Other regulations, such as the Medical Records Confidentiality Act of 1995 and the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995, specify severe sanctions for healthcare organizations that fail to guard the privacy of medical information. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act) of 
2009 strengthens privacy safeguards for patients’ protected health information. 
Although information management in a health plan environment is typically a complex process, not all aspects of information management are completely or even partially automated. In many instances, health plan personnel manually perform some or all of the steps necessary to obtain and use information. The automation of information management for health plans requires technical expertise and is generally expensive and time-consuming, but it is essential. 
Information Technology 
Information technology refers to the wide range of electronic devices and tools used to acquire, record, store, transfer, or transform data or information. The types of information technology used by health plans vary greatly, but in this section we will look at some of the most important. 
E-Business and E-Commerce  
In a health plan context, electronic business (e-business) and electronic commerce (e-commerce) refer to a plan's use of computer networks to perform business transactions and facilitate the delivery of healthcare and nonclinical services to members. The term e-business generally encompasses all types of electronic business functions, including the exchange of information both within the plan and with plan members, purchasers, providers, regulators, accrediting bodies, and potential members and purchasers. The term e-commerce refers to online commerce, including merchandising, sales, and payment. 
Although the automation of information exchange processes generally requires a significant upfront financial investment, conducting business electronically is now considered a basic business function. And e-business offers significant advantages over manual systems. The electronic transmission of data and information is typically faster, and this enables plans and providers to avoid delays in determining the appropriate care and in delivering that care to members. Furthermore, by enhancing online functionality, health plans can provide more access to information more efficiently, reducing support costs. A health plan’s e-business level of complexity and automation depends on the plan’s level of investment and online business maturity.  
The Internet provides health plans with a cost-effective means of transmitting and obtaining information and conducting selected informational transactions. Health plans generally have their own websites, which they use for a variety of purposes. Informational uses include: 
• marketing products and services to potential purchasers,  explaining the plan’s covered benefits and authorization systems to members, 
• supplying a network provider list and information about those providers to members, 
• educating members about healthy lifestyles and self-care,  reporting information on healthcare and service quality, and 
• disseminating member eligibility information, clinical practice management information, and formularies to providers. 
Transactions that can be performed include: 
• changing members’ administrative information (such as addresses),  changing members’ primary care providers,  refilling prescriptions by mail,  receiving and checking the status of claims filed by members and providers,  receiving and processing providers’ requests for authorizations of payment and transmitting the decisions on those requests,  updating member eligibility lists based on changes submitted by purchasers, and  receiving electronic payment from purchasers. 
While health plans have historically lagged behind other industries in providing a high level of service online, many plans have enhanced or are now enhancing their websites and are providing a variety of self-service functions to consumers, providers, employers and brokers. They are expanding into e-commerce, enabling consumers to shop for their healthcare coverage needs, price their options, and buy products online. 
Under healthcare reform, exchanges will be established where health plans can provide information about their products, and where consumers who meet certain criteria will be able to shop for coverage. Health plans will need to have the technical capability to submit information to these exchanges in an established format. 
Security Requirements and Considerations 
In doing business online, a health plan needs to protect the information that it makes available to users, as well as other information that may reside in the plan’s network. Since the Internet is open to everyone, the potential exists for unauthorized access to a health plan’s proprietary systems and to confidential information about individual members. In light of federal legislation in health information security (such as the privacy 
and security provisions of HIPAA) and customer expectations of privacy and confidentiality, healthcare executives need to be sure that their enterprises are not vulnerable to security breaches and that the applications and networks are appropriately secured. 
Some of the main types of Internet information security technology are these: 
• A firewall is a security device (hardware or software or both) designed to block unauthorized access to a network (such as an intranet) from the Internet while permitting authorized access.  
• An anti-virus program is designed to prevent viruses from infecting a computer and cleaning and restoring an infected computer. 
• Encryption is the transformation of text or data to make it unreadable to those who do not have special knowledge. This is done so that the information is accessible only to those for whom it is intended. 
• A digital signature (electronic signature) is an encrypted digital tag attached to an electronic communication to verify the identity of the sender. 
To obtain a higher level of security than presently exists on the Internet, some health plans have established intranets and secured extranets.  
• An intranet is an internal (private) computer network built on web-based technologies and standards. Access to an intranet is available only to members of the computer network. Intranets are utilized by health plans to provide internal employees with access to the various information management systems, as well as important content such as company news, administrative systems, document management systems, and other knowledge-bases. 
• An extranet is like an intranet, but it links selected resources of an organization to external entities or individuals. These external parties (in the case of health plans, providers, members, and regulatory and accrediting agencies) need a user ID and password (and sometimes encryption technology) to gain access. While many people may not be familiar with the term, they do often encounter and use extranets—secure access to a user’s information is a common functionality provided by many companies online including banks, credit card companies, retail sites, and health plans. 
The major threat to data security in a network is not a small number of external hackers but internal security breaches by employees or others authorized to use the network. The employee motivated by curiosity or malice, the careless employee who unwittingly provides an unauthorized user with access to a password, and the employee poorly trained in the use of a system remain the greatest threat to data security in any information network. Role-based security within an organization is essential to minimize such security breaches. 
Site Monitoring and Analytics 
Measurement of the availability and activity of a website is an important part of managing online capabilities. Monitoring software measures site availability and response time by running automated transactions and measuring task completion and the time taken. Web analytics record site activity such as page views, new versus repeat visitors, and other indicators of how users are using the site. Analytics is an important tool for measuring the success of a website for both serving a plan’s existing customers and attracting new ones. 
Electronic Data Interchange 
Electronic data interchange (EDI) is the computer-to-computer transfer of data between organizations using a data format agreed on by the sending and receiving parties. Information is routed through network systems and follows standards and procedures that allow output from one system to be processed directly, without human intervention, as input to other systems. Organizations doing business with one another by EDI are called trading partners. EDI differs from e-business that EDI is the transfer of data, typically in batches, while e-business involves back-and-forth exchanges of information concerning individual transactions and often the performance of some type of service. 

EDI can be used by health plans for the following activities: 
• the transmission of claims and encounter reports from providers to the health plan,  
• the transmission of data from the plan’s claims database to various medical management departments,   the transmission of data among different health plan departments or locations,  the exchange of data between a health plan and regulatory or accrediting bodies, 
• the transmission of membership and eligibility data from an employer to a health plan,   the transmission of member eligibility data from a health plan to its providers, and 
• the exchange of information between a health plan and its providers regarding requests for authorizations of services and referrals. 
The Advantages of EDI 
• Faster transmission and processing. EDI reduces the time required for purchasing, claims processing, and other functions, and it increases employee productivity, reducing costs. 
• Reduced paperwork. The exchange of standardized electronic forms for activities such as purchasing and claims can slash paperwork and the associated costs. The largest cost of claims processing is labor, particularly for data entry and examination functions, and electronic transmission and processing of claims can lower staffing requirements greatly.  
• Improved data integrity. In a manual process, each step has the potential for human error. For example, if a health plan receives paper claims or encounter reports, employees must enter the data into the plan’s system, and they may do so incorrectly. When such data is transmitted automatically, the potential for errors can be minimized. 
 Improved business methods. The use of EDI forces an organization to focus on and improve the details of repetitive transactions and to upgrade internal procedures. It creates an opportunity for process reengineering and realization of the efficiencies such reengineering can achieve. 
The pressure on the healthcare industry to reduce administrative costs is likely to drive still greater adoption of EDI. 
Technology Requirements for EDI  
EDI requires a data communication link between the participating organizations or departments. The Internet may serve as this link, or data may be sent by standard telephone lines. EDI also requires a standardized data format—computers cannot process the information that moves between organizations electronically unless it is encoded in a manner that the computers at both organizations can recognize. For EDI to achieve its full potential, all entities in the healthcare industry need to agree on common standards. Several organizations have already created or are developing such standards for various functions and types of data.  
Business Intelligence and Decision Support Systems 
In addition to improving access to data and information, information technology can support problem-specific decision-making. A business intelligence (BI) system or decision support system (DSS) uses databases and decision models to enhance the decision-making process for health plan executives, managers, clinical staff, and providers. They do so by analyzing data from a database and reporting the results. They can detect trends or relationships in the data that are not immediately obvious. For example, health plans may use a DSS to analyze the effect of healthcare services on members’ health, and this information can be used to identify the most effective medical interventions. Other capabilities often included in DSSs are provider profiling and tracking of provider reimbursement. 
One type of DSS is the expert system, a knowledge-based system that provides expert consultation to those solving specialized and complex problems. Expert systems apply general rules to data to determine the answer to specific questions. Their primary use by health plans is for claims administration, although some plans use them to assist with medical management decisions. The advantages are the ability to store and recall extensive sets of rules and to consistently apply those rules. 
For healthcare providers, DSS technologies focus on supplying information needed when clinical decisions are made. Such concurrent decision support systems provide users with patient-specific clinical information that can be used to develop treatment guidelines based on a specific diagnosis of a problem, warnings of drug interactions, etc., and to manage the appropriateness of referrals, procedures, and levels of care. These DSSs are viewed not as automated replacements for the expertise of providers, but rather as a tool to facilitate clinical and operational decisions. 
Data Warehouses 
A health plan’s information and data are typically gathered independently by different functional areas of the plan or external sources, and as a result they are often divided among distinct, unlinked databases. This means that someone seeking organizationwide information may have to search several databases in different functional areas or even within a single area. This increases the time it takes to acquire information and labor costs. In addition, the data from the various databases may be in different, incompatible formats, or a person may not have ready access to all databases.  
To address these problems, many health plans use data warehouses. A data warehouse is a database (or set of databases) containing data from many sources (often both internal and external) linked by a common subject (such as a plan member). The data from the various sources is integrated so that it is non-repetitive and in a standard format. Users can analyze the data in the warehouse through the use of query applications. 
Advantages and Disadvantages 
Data warehouses have many advantages: 
• Health plan personnel are better able to prepare complete, accurate reports because they can merge data from various separate sources (such as claims administration and utilization review). A consistent format also makes possible the comparison of data across different types of health plan products (such as HMO versus PPO) and against data from other health plans.  
• Data warehouses typically store large amounts of historical as well as current data, facilitating the analysis of information over time. For instance, suppose a medical management program director wants to know if the average age of the population covered by the plan in a geographic region is increasing and if this correlates with changes in the incidence of and cost of care for specific illnesses. Individual databases would probably not have this information, but a data warehouse combining data from many sources could.  
• A warehouse approach relieves individual databases from having to store large amounts of data that are not needed for daily operations, and decreasing the amount of data in a database typically speeds the response time to a query. 
• Data warehouses are the foundations of business intelligence and decision support systems. These systems analyze the data in warehouses to support decision-making. 
The principal disadvantages of data warehouses are the complexity and cost of implementing them. Typically, the construction of a data warehouse is very timeconsuming and requires significant technological expertise and financial resources. Consequently, even though a data warehouse may make health plan operations more efficient and improve the quality of healthcare, the return on the investment in one may not be realized for several years. 
Electronic Medical Records 
The medical records of health plan members have traditionally been in the form of paper documents and kept at the site where care was provided. But increasingly, providers and plans are using a electronic medical record (EMR), also called a computer-based patient record (CPR), a computerized record of a patient’s clinical, demographic, and administrative data.  
• Clinical data can include a member’s medical history, current and past medications, diagnoses, test results, current treatment status, and other healthcare information. Advanced EMRs can include digital images from CT scans, MRIs, and X-rays. 
• Demographic data include the member’s name, address, age, gender, and similar relevant information. 
• Administrative data can include the plan type (HMO, PPO, etc.), plan sponsor (the purchaser), membership number, and providers who have treated the member. 
While the exact data in EMRs vary, all EMRs include medical information for an individual member and are designed to be used at the site of care (such as a physician’s office, clinic, or hospital). This is in contrast to databases and data warehouses that typically organize information by categories such as the type of treatment or provider and are designed primarily for use in utilization and quality management. EMRs also include some clinical decision support for providers—for example, EMR software can be designed to alert a provider to possible drug interactions.  
Networks 
Health Information Networks 
EMRs enhance healthcare quality, but they are used at a particular site of care, and it is even more advantageous if medical records can be transmitted across an entire network of providers. One approach is distributing EMRs is through a health information network (HIN) or health data network (HDN), a computer network that gives the providers of a health plan access to a database of medical information.  
In one type of arrangement, a health plan’s HIN is linked to a data warehouse that stores the very large amounts of data that reside in the medical records of an entire provider network. The HIN makes the data in the warehouse available online to a defined set of users, such as health plan hospitals, physicians, pharmacists, and specified health plan personnel.  
A health plan can also use a secured extranet design or a distributed database approach for the HIN. With a distributed database approach, a database system (including either the whole database or only the relevant portion) is located at more than one site. For example, the EMR database might be available at several different hospitals and at large provider groups’ locations. 
Most HINs are Internet-based rather than built on proprietary computer networks. Whatever the network infrastructure, the health plan typically houses a central database or data warehouse that accepts, organizes, and stores EMR information as it is entered and then makes EMRs available to authorized users.  
Advantages of HINs 
HINs improve the quality of medical care because all the information in a patient’s medical history is readily available to each provider at the point of service. For example, suppose that a health plan operates a HIN that includes the hospitals, physicians, and pharmacies in the health plan’s network. After examining a patient, a PCP might write a prescription and make a referral to a specialist. The PCP’s staff updates the patient’s EMR to reflect the services delivered during the office visit. The pharmacist filling the prescription can immediately check it against the diagnosis and against other medications the patient is currently taking and note that the prescription was filled. The specialist can see what medications were prescribed, what tests were conducted, and what notes the PCP made regarding the diagnosis. When the health plan reviews the claim, it can match diagnostic and treatment codes, verify authorization, and record utilization information. 
HIN-supported EMRs have a distinct advantage over non-networked forms of medical record-keeping, particularly the common practice of using paper documents. A HIN allows multiple healthcare professionals, even in different locations, to access a member’s chart simultaneously. With paper records, if a plan member receives care from providers at different physical locations, either the paper records must be copied and faxed or carried between locations, or the providers themselves must discuss the details of the chart. Further, with paper records, the possibility exists that records may be lost or at least temporarily misplaced. 
The capacity of HINs to capture a large amount of data about healthcare services and outcomes in a uniform format also affords health plans the following benefits: 
 Improved care and service. Immediate access to current, complete information about members facilitates providers’ delivery of high-quality care in a timely and cost-effective manner. Improved access to information also improves continuity of care. For example, a HIN provides a means of reducing duplicate services and otherwise coordinating care among providers in different locations.  
 	Cheaper information administration. A HIN may help a health plan reduce its administrative costs by enabling more accurate and efficient claims processing, online authorization of payment for services, electronic transfer to mail-order pharmacy programs, improved credentialing, up-to-date online provider directories, up-to-date membership lists, and online case management.  
 	Improved outcomes measurement. Health plans can extract outcome trends from the HIN data warehouse using computer software designed for this purpose. This outcome information can be used for developing clinical practice management tools such as clinical practice guidelines.  
 Better management of provider performance. Using data gathered through its HIN, a health plan can identify providers who have superior outcomes and who comply with UM and QM programs. 
 Improved efficiency and accuracy of information entry. Most HIN systems present providers and their staffs with computer screens that list standard options for entering data about patient care. Rather than type in this data or record it on paper, the provider or staff member can simply click on the appropriate option, which saves time and reduces the possibility for clerical error.  
 Reduced legal liability. EMRs and HINs give providers a means of documenting their work to show compliance with quality programs, and they assist health plans in demonstrating that quality care is being uniformly delivered to plan members. 
 Easier reporting. HINs give a health plan a vehicle for capturing information that may be required by regulatory agencies or accrediting bodies. 
Health Information Exchange and Regional Health Information Organizations 
The advantages of HINs are multiplied when medical records and other information can be accessed not only by all the providers of a health plan’s network, but throughout the healthcare system. Health information exchange (HIE) is the electronic sharing of clinical information among the information systems of the various healthcare organizations of a community or region. 
HIE gives a physician or other provider access to records of the care and services a patient has received from many providers, both inside and outside her health plan’s network, both current and past. This further extends the gains of an HIN, enhancing the quality of care and helping to avoid errors, as providers’ decision can be based on complete and accurate information from all sources. HIE also has great potential for cost-savings, as the duplication of tests and services can be eliminated, referrals and consultations can be conducted more quickly and easily, and administrative time to obtain or send records can be reduced—again, even when care has been received outside a plan’s network. HIE also provides a wealth of data for quality and utilization management and for research and public health goals. 
Organizations, both independent and government-sponsored, have emerged to set up and operate HIE; they are called HIE systems or simply health information exchanges (HIEs). Regional health information organizations (RHIOs) have been formed by the healthcare entities of a geographic area (such as hospitals, clinics, health plans, and purchasers). RHIOs and other HIEs develop and manage contractual agreements between entities, arrange for the means of electronic exchange of information, and establish and maintain standards. Many RHIOs and other HIEs are supported financially by grants from the federal government, provided under the HITECH Act.  
Personal Health Records and Electronic Health Records 
Personal Health Records 
A personal health record (PHR) is a history of an individual’s health and her encounters with the healthcare system that is owned by the individual and securely maintained for her by a custodian, typically her health plan. A PHR is populated with claims and administrative data collected by the individual’s health plan and in some cases information entered by the person herself, and it forms a coherent, personal history of care that can be used to coordinate and track her encounters with the healthcare system. PHRs will eventually be portable across the healthcare system, so that as an individual changes health plans or employers or enrolls in Medicare, her PHR will go with her. 
Many health plans offer PHRs to their members, often in partnership with entities such as WebMD, American Specialty Health, and others. In addition, both Google and Microsoft now offer online computer applications that enable people to store personal health information in a centralized place for access by themselves or other authorized people such as family members and providers.  
The major barrier to widespread implementation of PHRs is the lack of a standard that would allow the information in a PHR to be both inter-operable (usable by different entities) and portable. While a number of current standards and data sets exist, gaps remain and there is no comprehensive “PHR standard.” 
Electronic Health Records 
An electronic health record (EHR) is a provider-based history of care that compliments the personal health record by adding detailed information created by providers and facilities (such as X-ray images, physicians’ notes, and information on compliance with statutory or regulatory requirements) that are part of the legal and permanent institutional records of patient care. 
In 2004 President George Bush called for the widespread adoption of inter-operable EHRs within the next decade, and efforts at the national level have focused on EHR adoption and the development of interconnectivity among the numerous healthcare stakeholders. Adoption has been slow, but the HITECH Act of 2009 mentioned above is expected to spur increased innovation and use of EHRs. It provides for incentive payments to organizations that can prove meaningful use of them and reduced Medicare reimbursements for those that cannot. 
Outsourcing Information Management 
The technical demands of designing, setting up, and maintaining information management systems and processes can be considerable. External vendors offer a wide variety of services and products, and they may be hired by health plans to help them design and establish new systems such as data warehouses or HINs. A health plan may also outsource some or all of its information management activities to an external vendor rather than conduct them itself. The plan specifies its information management requirements and provides data to a vendor that designs an appropriate system and conducts the information management activity on a day-to-day basis. The vendor also creates the reports that the health plan requires. 
Advances in technology and connectivity have made possible hybrids of insourcing and outsourcing. Software-as-a-service (SAAS) and cloud computing can now enable an organization to achieve the benefits of sophisticated systems without the investment in infrastructure or the operational costs of maintaining them internally. As cloud computing grows, the capabilities that it offers and the level and ease of integration with the variety of systems in use by health plans will evolve. 
The purchase of information management products and outsourcing arrangements are typically long-term commitments for a health plan. Outsourcing often requires a significant financial investment and complex legal and administrative arrangements. And because information management is so critical to a health plan's operations, any disruption in the relationship between the plan and the vendor can be very costly for the plan. Therefore, a plan should select a vendor that is financially stable and has a reputation for high-quality products and technical support.  
Conclusion  
Health plans are increasingly information-driven, so a plan’s approach to information management impacts virtually every aspect of its operations. Information technology has grown in importance because many plans have discovered that its effective use can improve the performance of their people and processes. The trend toward greater investment in technology, particularly Internet-based technology, is likely to continue as health plans attempt to achieve quality and cost-effectiveness in a highly competitive industry. 

21 Claims Administration 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 describe the roles of technology and personnel in claims processing,   discuss the use of codes and edits in claim processing, and   state the main questions that must be answered in processing a claim. 
A claim is a request to an insurer or health plan for payment of benefits. In health coverage, it usually takes the form of an itemized statement of healthcare services delivered by a healthcare provider to a covered person, along with the cost of those services. The person or entity submitting a claim is called the claimant; this may be an insured, but in health coverage it is most often a provider. Claims administration or claims processing is the receiving, reviewing, adjudicating, and paying of claims. (To adjudicate a claim is to make determinations and decisions about it.) 
In this module we examine the processing of health plan claims by automated computer systems and by claims examiners and other personnel; learn about important elements of processing systems, such as standardized claim forms, diagnosis and treatment codes, and edits; and survey the adjudication of a claim by identifying the questions that must be answered before a claim can be paid.  Health Plan Claims  
Traditional Insurance and Health Plans 
In traditional indemnity health insurance, the provider sends a bill to the insurer for the services delivered (or less commonly the insured pays the provider herself and then sends a claim to the insurer with the provider’s bill attached as documentation). The insurer processes the claim to determine if payment is in fact due and if so pays the provider or insured.  
In a health plan, the claims function varies by plan type and provider compensation arrangement. In some cases a plan such as an HMO does not receive claims requesting payment for services rendered because providers are prepaid for delivering those services to members by means of a capitation payment, or because they are paid a salary. Instead, the plan receives encounter reports. An encounter is a visit by a plan member to a provider of healthcare or related services. An encounter report includes the services provided, the date of service, the diagnosis, and other information. A health plan uses encounter reports to track utilization and provider practice patterns and as a basis for future capitation amounts. 
However, most healthcare professionals are compensated by health plans on a discounted fee-for-service (FFS) basis or a combination of FFS and capitation, and hospitals are typically paid their regular charges minus a percentage discount, case rates, or fixed rates for specific procedures. In these cases, claims are submitted, and health plan claims processing is very similar to that of traditional insurance. 
Technology 
In the past health plan claims were mostly paper documents received by mail and reviewed and adjudicated by plan employees. Today, typically between 80 and 90 percent of a plan’s claims are processed by automated, computerized systems, sometimes more. Providers generally transmit claims to a plan by electronic data interchange (EDI) (discussed in the preceding module). When paper claims are received, the data is entered into the electronic system so that they can be automatically processed. Increasingly, optical character recognition (OCR) technology is used to convert printed or even handwritten text into electronic files. 
Electronic claims processing systems perform routine and simple tasks, such as verifying that an individual is a plan member or that a doctor is a network provider. And most health plans also use such systems to make decisions that require more in-depth analysis. A database containing member profiles, member benefit packages, provider profiles, provider compensation arrangements, and other information is either integrated with or part of an expert software system enabling the claims system to make higherlevel claims decisions. Such a system attempts to replicate the process an expert claims examiner uses to solve a problem to arrive at the same decision that the expert would. This process is commonly called auto-adjudication.  
Federal legislation promotes the electronic transmission of claims and the automation of claims processing. Provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) standardize electronic claims submission and payment while safeguarding the privacy and security of individuals’ health information. 
Personnel 
Of course, computers cannot do everything and cannot run themselves—many health plan employees are involved in processing claims. A claims administration department includes the following personnel: 
• Data entry clerks key in information from paper documents, and other employees convert documents into electronic data in other ways (such as scanning and OCR). This function is often outsourced. 
• Other employees are variously called claims examiners, processors, reviewers, analysts, or adjudicators. Their exact duties may vary by title or plan, but essentially they review and adjudicate claims that are not electronically processed for some reason, typically because they present some complication or there is an inconsistency in the data or other problem. 
• Claims adjustors deal with claims that have been paid incorrectly. For instance, if an insufficient amount is paid and the provider protests, the adjustor reviews the case and ensures that the correct amount is paid. 
• Specialists of various sorts handle complicated cases and address such matters as quality control, regulatory compliance, coordination of benefits, and medical management.  
• Supervisors and managers oversee the work of claims examiners, other employees, and automated systems. They may also handle complex and largeamount claims. 
Explaining the payment or denial of a claim to a provider or member is typically handled by the member services department (discussed in the next module), not claims, although of course the two departments must work closely together.  
A claims administration department may be organized by plan type (HMO, PPO, etc.), service type (hospital, physician, etc.), in-network and out-of-network care, or employer group (especially for large groups). Some health plans contract with insurance companies or third-party administrators to process certain types of claims, such as routine claims, out-of-network claims, or claims for specialty services such as radiology, behavioral health, and pharmacy. 
Information 
A claims administration department both takes in a great deal of information and supplies information to other plan departments. For a claims database the following types of information are needed: 
• information on members and their covered dependents, including date of birth, gender, and PCP; 
• information on providers, including the national provider identifier (NPI), network or non-network status, and any restrictions on the types of services a provider can perform for the plan; 
• general information on provider compensation (such as fee schedules) and the specific compensation arrangement the plan has with each provider (including risk-pooling, discounts, etc.); and 
• requirements for members, including cost-sharing (deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance) and authorization and referral requirements.  
The information that is needed is also affected by compensation methods, as discussed above. If a provider is paid by capitation or salary, only encounter reports with a relatively limited amount of information is required. On the other hand, if a provider is compensated by fee-for-service, a fee schedule, a discount off charges, or similar methods, full claim information is needed. Typically, a plan’s claims processing system must be able to handle both types of arrangements. For example, in an HMO a PCP may be paid by capitation but a specialist by discounted FFS. 
The claims department is also a source of information for the plan. Data obtained in the claims process is transmitted to and used by other departments, including member services, finance, information management, medical management, provider relations, contracting, and others. It may also be used for marketing purposes, but there are regulatory restrictions—a member must agree to this.  
Finally, a claims department uses data to generate a variety of periodic reports to help it manage its own productivity and quality. These include the percentage of claims processed within a certain timeframe, such as 30 days; the percentage auto-adjudicated; the percentage rejected or denied; and the percentage adjusted and/or appealed. 
Key Elements of Claim Processing 
Standard Claim Forms 
Most health plans have done away with their own claims forms and require the use of these nationally standardized forms: 
• UB-04—required by the Uniform Billing Code of 2004 and used by healthcare facilities and organizations (hospitals, clinics, home healthcare agencies, etc.). 
• CMS-1500—developed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and used by healthcare professionals such as physicians. 
Codes 
To indicate in a claim a patient’s medical condition and the service or treatment provided, claimants must use standard diagnostic and treatment codes. A code is a series of numbers and letters that corresponds to a specific diagnosis or treatment. These codes help simplify and standardize claims processing.  
• For diagnoses, the required code set is the International Classification of 
Diseases (ICD). As of October 1, 2013, for healthcare transactions covered by HIPAA (including most claims) the Tenth Revision of the ICD (ICD-10) will be required. 
• For treatments, the most frequently used code set is the Physicians’ Current Procedural Terminology (CPT). This is a list of medical services and procedures performed by physicians, hospitals, and other healthcare providers, with a unique 5-digit code for each. CPT codes are maintained by the American Medical Association and are also referred to as Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) Level 1 codes.  
Edits 
An electronic claims processing system, as well as the procedures followed by claims examiners, includes edits. These are criteria that, if unmet, result in a claim being “kicked out” of the process and “pended”—that is, the claim is not automatically processed, but instead payment is delayed while the claim is scrutinized and concerns addressed. For example, an electronic system generally includes an edit that identifies a claim in which the service provided is not generally associated with the diagnosis reported. Such a claim would be kicked out and reviewed to see if the service was in fact appropriate. 
Adjudicating a Claim 
Adjudicating a claim (determining whether it should be paid and if so how much) can be thought of as satisfying a number of questions about the claim. In this section we review the main questions. 
Member and Provider Status and Timely Billing 
• The system must confirm that the person who received the services being billed was a member of the plan and eligible for benefits on the date the services were provided. 
• It must be confirmed that the provider is enrolled in the plan’s claims system. If not, the claim will be sent back to her with a request for information so that she can be enrolled.  
• If a plan does not pay benefits for out-of-network care or pays a higher level of benefits for in-network care, it must be determined whether the provider is a network provider. 
• Most plans require that a provider bill within a certain time (typically 90 to 180 days) after a service has been delivered. If a claim is submitted after that time, it is not generally paid, and the provider is not allowed to bill the member for the service. Therefore, it must be confirmed that the claim has been submitted within the required time after the service was delivered. 
Edits relying on dates of service, member numbers, providers’ NPIs, and other data are used to identify claims that do not satisfy the above conditions and must be examined or denied. 
The Healthcare Service 
An automated claims system (or a claims examiner) must also ascertain whether the healthcare service provided to the member was a covered service under the member’s benefit package, medically necessary and appropriate, authorized if required, and actually performed. 
Uncovered Services 
As we have seen, some healthcare services are not covered by a health plan. These include experimental treatments as well as procedures not needed to address an illness or injury (such as cosmetic surgery). Such uncovered services must be identified by the process and the claim denied. 
Medical Necessity and Appropriateness 
As we have learned in this course, health plans pay benefits only for healthcare services that are medically necessary and appropriate, and the claims process includes confirming that the services provided were in fact necessary and appropriate. This also promotes healthcare quality by ensuring that members receive the services that are most likely to result in positive outcomes. And it reduces a plan’s medical malpractice liability—a plan can be liable for the negligent acts of its employees or medical staff and in some cases contracted providers, so it must take measures to ensure that the care they provide is appropriate. 
Clinical edits flag claims for which additional medical information is needed, such as when diagnosis and treatment codes are missing, incomplete, or invalid. The claim is kicked out of the system, and the provider must resubmit it with complete and correct information. Edits are also triggered by conflicting information (a diagnosis code for tonsillitis and a treatment code for bursitis) or illogical responses or codes (a maternity service for a male). Such claims must be examined and clarified. Clinical edits are typically supplied by an external vendor whose software specializes in healthcare codes and is integrated with the health plan’s claims system. 
Authorization 
As we have also learned, for some services most health plans have authorization or referral requirements that must be met for benefits to be payable. An electronic claims processing system is typically set up to recognize these services and look for a corresponding authorization in the plan’s databases. If authorization is not found, the claim will be flagged and reviewed by a claims examiner.  
If authorization was not obtained, the health plan is not obligated to pay for the service; more traditional plans may pay a reduced amount (typically 50 percent). In some plans the authorization for a particular case may stipulate how much will be paid. 
Delivery 
Obviously, if a service billed was not actually provided to a member, the plan will not pay, and fraud may even be involved. If information is insufficient to show that a service was in fact rendered, or if something indicates that the service may not have been rendered (such as a nonemergency service reported for a Saturday, or a physician billing for more visits on a certain date than would be reasonably possible during a working day), the claim must be examined and more information sought. 
The Amount 
The system (or claims examiner) calculates the amount to be paid for a claim based on numerous factors. These include the provider compensation arrangement that applies (fee schedule, discount off charges, etc); any cost-sharing owed by the member (deductible, copayment, or coinsurance, including differences for network and nonnetwork care); any payment instructions stipulated by an authorization; and other considerations. 
It must also be ascertained whether a member is covered under another health plan, and if so, whether coordination of benefits applies. Recall that coordination of benefits provisions are designed to prevent a person covered under more than one health plan from receiving more in benefits than her actual expenses and to ensure that each plan pays the correct amount. 
Summarizing the Process 
To summarize the proceeding paragraphs, the process by which a claim is adjudicated can be seen as satisfactorily answering a series of questions:  
• Was the individual who received healthcare services a member of the plan and eligible for benefits when the services were provided?  
• Is the provider enrolled in the plan’s claims system? Is the provider in the plan’s network?  
• Has the claim been submitted in a timely manner? 
• Is the service covered?  
• Was the service medically necessary and appropriate?  
• Was an authorization or referral required for the service, and if so, was it obtained?  
• Was the service actually provided? 
• What benefits are payable?  
• Does the member have any other health insurance coverage?  Claim Investigations 
If a claim lacks important information, a plan may simply deny it, and the provider must modify and resubmit it. In other cases, if a claim triggers an edit, or if a claims examiner has reason to question the claim, there may be a claim investigation—the plan seeks further information before making a decision. Usually this involves only short, simple searches or requests, such as checking a medical record or calling a doctor’s office. Such basic investigations are typically handled by claims examiners by phone, email, or mail or database search.  
However, a few claims require extensive investigation. A good deal of information may be needed, or information may not be easy to obtain. An interview or extensive communications with a provider or member may be necessary. Expertise may be required, such as from the plan’s medical staff. A claims specialist or supervisor may take over the claim. 
Sometimes fraud is suspected. Such cases are turned over to a plan’s special investigative unit (SIU), staffed by people trained and experienced in fraudulent schemes and how they can be detected and dealt with. If fraud is in fact detected, an SIU may work with the plan’s legal department or law enforcement agencies.  Regulation 
As mentioned above, HIPAA promotes the electronic transmission of health plan claims in a standardized format. HIPAA also protects the privacy and security of members’ health information while allowing health plans to conduct investigations. In addition, the NAIC Unfair Claims Settlement Practices Act, adopted in whole or in part by many states, sets standards for the handling and investigation of insurance claims. The Act lists certain insurer or health plan actions and defines them as unfair claims practices, and if a plan commits these actions so frequently that they can be considered to constitute a general business practice, the plan is in violation of the Act. A health plan may not conceal from a claimant information relevant to a claim. A plan must promptly acknowledge receipt of a claim and communications related to the claim. It cannot delay paying a claim by asking for redundant or unnecessary information and documentation. It must generally process a clean claim (one that does not require the plan to seek additional information) within 30 days of receipt. It must have reasonable cause to delay adjudication of a claim to conduct an investigation, and an investigation must be finished in 30 days unless it cannot be reasonably completed in that time.  
Conclusion 
Prompt and accurate processing of claims is a key driver of member satisfaction with a health plan, and it is also critical to maintaining good working relationships with providers. Therefore, a successful health plan will select and train its claims personnel and manage its claims department with an eye to providing top-notch service. 

22 Member Services 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• name and describe the four main categories of health plan member services; 
• discuss how health plans manage accessibility, personnel, processes, technology, and performance for member services; and  
• describe several ways in which health plans use technology to facilitate the delivery of member services. 
Member services consist of a broad range of activities that a health plan and its employees engage in to support the delivery of benefits to its members and to keep them satisfied with the plan. Member services typically involve a mix of inbound member contacts (member-initiated requests for information, transactions, services, and assistance with problems) and outbound member contacts (those initiated by the plan). Meeting members’ ongoing service needs in an effective and efficient manner presents a variety of challenges for a health plan. 
In this module we first describe the types of activities that are included in health plan member services and how they are conducted. We then look at how plans manage various aspects of member services to enhance both quality and cost-effectiveness. In both cases, we learn how technology is used to support a plan’s activities. Member Services Activities  
Member services activities generally fall into four main categories: member education; assistance with questions, transactions, and requests; complaint management; and measurement and reporting of member satisfaction. 
Member Education 
Many of the problems that health plan members experience with their coverage arise because they do not understand the plan’s benefits or the requirements for accessing them. The education of members about benefits, cost-sharing, and authorization before they need services can reduce member confusion, leading to fewer telephone calls to the plan to ask questions, fewer complaints, and greater satisfaction when members actually use services. For example, proactive education about a plan’s requirements for authorization of payment can reduce disputes about claims. Many plans also proactively provide members with information about preventive care and other health issues, which can enhance member satisfaction and reduce members’ needs for healthcare services. 
Proactive education programs are often referred to as member outreach programs. 
Outreach programs may focus on administrative information, health information, or both. In many instances, these programs provide general information for the entire plan membership. Typically, members receive information about the plan when they enroll, and information about new programs, plan changes, and health issues is distributed periodically. The types of information that health plans generally distribute to all members include the following:  
• services covered and excluded for different types of care (physician, hospital, emergency, ancillary, drugs, etc.); 
• member responsibilities (paying copayments, deductibles, or coinsurance and obtaining referrals and authorization of payment when required);  services requiring authorization and guidelines for obtaining it;  network providers, their locations and credentials;  differences in benefit levels for in-network and out-of-network care;  the drug formulary; 
• available programs and services (such as screenings, disease management, and telephone triage lines) 
• general health information (on nutrition, exercise, safety, smoking cessation, common illnesses, and disease prevention); and  options for resolving complaints and appealing health plan decisions. 
A health plan may also identify groups of members with a common characteristic, such as age, gender, or a chronic illness, and send them relevant health-related information. For example, a plan might send information on mammogram and Pap test screenings to all adult female members, or information on diabetes management to members with that illness. 
Distributing Information 
Traditionally, health plans have used mass mailings of letters and newsletters to distribute information to members. But today, except when there is a regulatory requirement to notify members by mail of a change, plans more often use websites and email. A website can provide the types of information listed above, as well as answers to frequently asked questions, links to other health websites, and information on healthcare services available in the community. Email or electronic newsletters can be used to welcome new members and provide updates. Social media sites and tools can be used to educate members on benefits or engage them in health and wellness programs. And some health plans use telephone outreach programs to give new members basic plan information and check to see if they have questions or are confused about anything. 
The target audience affects the way educational information should be presented. For instance, members with vision or hearing impairments must be accommodated, Medicare members may need large print, and languages other than English may be required. Accessibility guidelines for websites and online communication should be followed as well as state requirements for communications for government program members. Finally, educational materials must clearly communicate the information in a way that the typical member can understand. For this reason, health plans often conduct marketing research tests (such as focus groups) on their educational tools before finalizing them and making them available to members. 
Assistance with Questions, Transactions, and Requests  
Health plans must also answer members’ questions about administrative, coverage, access, and health issues; assist them with transactions; and respond to other service requests. Some examples of typical member questions and requests are listed in the box below. 
Some Typical Member Questions and Requests 
Administrative issues: 
• The information on my identification card is out of date, and I need a new one. 
• Please send me a new provider directory. 
• My PCP has moved out of the area, so I need to pick a new one. 
• What is the mailing address for submitting a claim? 
Coverage: 
• What benefits do I have for chiropractic treatment? 
• Does the plan pay for prescriptions from out-of-network providers? 
• What portion of the bill will I have to pay for my stay in the hospital when I have surgery? 
• My doctor says I need eyeglasses. Are they covered? 
Access: 
• How do I get authorization for the echocardiogram my cardiologist ordered? 
• Do I need a referral to see a dermatologist? 
• How long does it take the plan to process a request for authorization of payment after a provider has recommended a procedure? 
• What are my options if the plan does not authorize payment for a service recommended by my doctor? 
Health plan programs: 
• Who can I call if I’m not sure what kind of care I need? 
• Does the plan have any programs for expectant mothers? • I want information to help me manage my asthma better. 
• What types of preventive care or self-care programs does the plan offer? There are a number of means by which health plans can respond to members. Regardless of the communication medium, all inbound and outbound contacts should be tracked to ensure that any follow-up activities are completed and member needs are met. 
Telephone Systems 
Plans generally have toll-free telephone numbers for members to call. A plan may make available the numbers of different departments so that members can directly dial the one they need, or it may have one central number and route calls by means of computer/telephony integration (CTI), a technology that unites a computer system and a telephone system. Two forms of CTI commonly used by health plans are automatic call distributors (ACDs) and interactive voice response (IVR). 
• An automatic call distributor (ACD) answers calls with a recorded message and then routes them to the appropriate unit based on information that the caller enters on the telephone keypad (such as his member identification number) or his phone number. If no representative in the appropriate unit is available, the ACD places the call in a queue to be answered when a representative becomes available. ACDs prevent callers from receiving a busy signal during times of high call volume and expedite their connection to an appropriate representative.  
• An interactive voice response (IVR) system answers calls with recorded or synthesized speech and prompts the caller to respond to a menu of options by entering information through his keypad or speaking. Each response takes the caller to the next appropriate menu until he receives the desired information, hangs up, or speaks to a representative.  
An IVR system can handle many of the questions and requests that in the past required speaking with a member services representative. Some IVR systems even allow selfservice for certain transactions. For example, a series of IVR menus might direct the member through the process required to choose a new PCP, order a provider directory, or check the status of a claim. Another advantage of IVR is that it can handle many calls simultaneously. Members benefit from IVR because it enables them to obtain information at times when member services representatives are not available. 
Mail and Fax 
Letters and other paper documents sent through the mail still account for much of a health plan’s inbound and outbound contact with members. The mail is typically used to deliver important notifications (such as formulary updates and changes in authorization requirements); to respond to complaints or appeals; and to handle many routine transactions (such as premium payments, address changes, claims processing, and explanations of benefits). The extent to which mail systems are automated varies among plans. In some cases a plan may accept documents from members by fax.  
Email 
Email is an important means of communicating with members. A plan needs an internal tool that allows categorization and tracking of messages and a knowledge base that can be used to answer the most frequent questions. Member service representatives need training in proper procedures. HIPAA requirements for protecting patient information (discussed in a later module) apply, and secure messaging or email encryption may be required. 
Online 
Many health plan websites enable members to access their accounts by entering a company-issued user ID or password and conduct certain transactions, such as changing their address, adding new family members to coverage, selecting a new PCP, obtaining forms, or filing claims. A website may also allow a member to communicate with a member services representative by means of online chat. With a click-to-callback feature, a member can request a call from a service representative, either immediately or at a scheduled time.  
A health plan may want to consider providing technical support for members having difficulty using its website, including co-browsing, where the member services representative shares the view of the member’s screen in order to assist him. Also, people are increasingly accessing the Internet through mobile devices instead of desktop computers, and health plans need to address this change. Already, applications such as provider searches and prescription information are in use, and many more will no doubt become available. 
Complaint Management  
Despite a health plan’s best efforts, some members will disagree with certain actions or decisions taken by the plan or its providers. Such disagreements often result in members’ complaints about plan coverage, access to services, medical services received, nonclinical service from providers or their staff, or service from a health plan department. Many complaints stem from the authorization process and decisions.  
Examples of Member Complaints 
Complaints about the plan: 
• The person I talked to in claims was rude and wouldn’t answer my question. 
• The doctor told me I need to start physical therapy as soon as possible, but the plan hasn’t authorized payment yet. 
• The plan’s procedures for getting authorization for payment are too complicated and confusing. 
• If this medical procedure is listed as a covered service and my doctor says I need it, the plan should pay for it. • I have to select a PCP, but none of the network PCPs near me is accepting new patients. 
Complaints about providers: 
• When I call for an appointment with a rheumatologist, the earliest time available for a new patient is two months away. 
• The doctor was in a big rush and did not explain my problem in a way I could understand. 
• My PCP does not return my phone calls. 
• On my last visit to my doctor, I had to wait over an hour before I was seen. 
• My PCP’s office is too far away from my home, and there’s never any parking available nearby. 
• I don’t think my doctor prescribed the right treatment for my illness. 
• My PCP’s office lost the results of the blood tests they did during my last visit.  The staff at my doctor’s office is more concerned with their own personal problems that the reason for my visit. 
• The hospital you sent me to didn’t have the right equipment to treat my condition. There are a number of reasons health plans must adequately address member complaints. First, there are generally regulatory requirements governing the resolution of complaints that health plans must comply with. Also, unresolved complaints lead to member dissatisfaction and can result in negative publicity—especially today with the popularity of social media and websites in which consumers comment on and rate businesses. Finally, unresolved complaints may evolve into appeals, requiring more time and resources. For all these reasons, even if a complaint is considered to be unjustified, the member’s perception that he has not been treated correctly needs to be addressed. 
Complaint Resolution Procedures 
Health plans establish complaint resolution procedures (CRPs) to address informal complaints, such as those made by phone or in a letter, as well as formal appeals, which occur when an informal complaint is not resolved to a member’s satisfaction. Many states have laws regarding CRPs; these vary from state to state, but they typically require plans to inform all members about procedures for complaints, track and report complaints, respond to complaints within a certain time, and give members the option of an independent external review when internal reviews are exhausted. At the federal level, employer-sponsored health plans must meet the appeal requirements of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), and the Affordable Care Act (healthcare reform) also includes rules in this area. Finally, accrediting agencies have standards for handling member complaints and appeals, which address documentation and investigation of complaints, notification of members about rights to appeal, qualifications of persons who review appeals, timeframes for appeals, notification of involved parties about appeal decisions, and members’ rights to independent external review. 
The Appeal Process  
In a formal appeal, a dispute is reviewed and resolved by a party other than the person who made the initial decision or performed the service that led to the complaint. The appeal process follows established procedures and typically includes at least two levels. 
• In a level one appeal, a medical director or other officer of the health plan reviews the original decision and any additional supporting information submitted by the complaining member and either upholds or overturns the decision. If the decision is upheld, the member has the right to go to the next level. 
• Level two appeals are generally handled by a health plan appeals committee, typically consisting of representatives of various areas within the plan, such as utilization review, member services, health plan operations, and legal affairs (and sometimes plan members). If the appeal involves a medical issue, the committee includes a physician. The committee reviews all of the relevant documentation on the complaint and the previous appeal and collects new information as necessary before upholding or overturning the decision. 
A health plan’s CRPs specify maximum timeframes for conducting each level of appeal. There are also procedures for expedited appeals when following the standard time limits might endanger the member’s health. Many states require an expedited appeal process for pre-authorization denials based on the plan’s decision that the treatment is not medically necessary or experimental.  
After she has exhausted a health plan’s internal appeal process, a member may be able to pursue other avenues. 
• Mediation or arbitration. In mediation an impartial person experienced in dispute resolution works with the member and the plan to help them come to an agreement acceptable to both. Arbitration is similar, but the mediator’s decision is final and binding on both parties. 
• Government agencies. Laws vary by state, but a member may be able to appeal to the state insurance or health department. Members of a plan under the Federal Employees Health Benefit (FEHB) system can appeal to the federal Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and Medicare beneficiaries can appeal to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 
• Independent external review is conducted by a third party that is not affiliated with the health plan or a providers’ association and has no conflict of interest or stake in the outcome of the review, often an independent review organization (IRO), a company specializing in this area. It may involve mediation or a binding decision. Some states require that members have the option of an independent external review after they have exhausted the internal appeals process. 
Member Satisfaction Measurement and Reporting  
Member satisfaction is, of course, critical to a health plan’s success and survival. If a plan cannot maintain high levels of overall satisfaction and improve areas that members find unsatisfactory, members are likely to disenroll. Member satisfaction is also important for maintaining the plan’s positive image in publications that rate the performance of health plans and in the general media. 
Measurements of member satisfaction help a plan understand which of its services work well and which need improvement. These measurements are compared to plan, industry, and external standards and are tracked over time to identify trends. Generally, a health plan considers its members’ satisfaction with the following: the plan as a whole, access to healthcare services (both the availability of providers and referral and authorization rules), the quality of healthcare, the quality of nonclinical services (from both the plan and its providers), and the plan’s administration (member services, claims, billing, and authorization systems). The two primary ways of measuring member satisfaction are member satisfaction surveys and complaint monitoring. 
Member Satisfaction Surveys  
Member satisfaction surveys can be conducted by phone, mail, or email, or online. There are several types.  
• Plans often survey members at a specified interval following contact with a provider. For example, a plan might contact members who recently had procedures performed at a hospital and ask these sorts of questions: How understandable was authorization process? Was it conducted in a timely manner? Did any problems occur? How satisfactory was the medical care received? How about the nonclinical services? How clean and well-equipped were the facilities? What could the health plan or the hospital staff have done to make your experience better? 
• Plans periodically survey a sample of the entire member population. This is done to measure the satisfaction of all members, not just those who have received healthcare services recently. Members who rarely need care cost the plan little, so it is important to ensure that they are happy and will remain members. 
• A plan may also survey former members to determine why they left and get their input about the plan’s benefits, medical care, and costs. 
• Ongoing feedback mechanisms and online surveys are also conducted to determine the effectiveness of a plan’s website and other online communication channels such as email, mobile, and chat.  
Member satisfaction surveys may be conducted by member services employees or outside companies. Some accreditation programs and purchasers require health plans to use third parties for this. Perhaps the best-known third-party member satisfaction survey is the CAHPS survey mentioned in the module on quality standards. The core questions of the CAHPS survey cover specific aspects of customer service and overall measures of consumer experience with the plan. The CAHPS system provides questionnaires, directions for conducting surveys and reporting results, and sample formats for reports of results. 
Complaint Monitoring 
Member services personnel document, track, and report member complaints. Complaints are categorized by type (enabling the plan to determine how widespread a problem is) and by the plan department or provider involved (to identify the source of a problem). Periodic reports are generated, which managers can use to identify problems, assess their extent and seriousness, investigate and resolve them, and track them over time. 
Complaints often lead not only to improving unsatisfactory performance by plan and provider personnel, but also to changes in a plan’s services and procedures. For instance, if a plan receives numerous complaints that its authorizations procedures are confusing, it might rewrite the information it gives members about these procedures to make them clearer, or it might even change the procedures themselves to make them simpler and easier to follow. Likewise, in response to member feedback a plan might add benefits or programs, such as coverage of alternative treatments such as acupuncture or massage therapy or a mail-order drug program. 
Managing Member Services 
Structure 
Some health plans have a dedicated member services department, but in others the personnel of several departments (such as claims, enrollment, and account management) provide function-specific services directly to members. Plans with defined networks, authorization systems, and a variety of programs to manage quality and utilization (such as HMOs and POS plans) typically have a separate member services department because they receive a large volume of inquiries and service requests from members. Plans with fewer network and medical management programs (such as PPOs) often handle member services through multiple departments. However, large and medium-sized plans of any type may find that the volume of their members’ service needs justifies having a dedicated member services unit.  
Some health plans with separate member services departments have within them specialized units that focus on specific products, such as a company’s HMO or PPO product or its Medicare or Medicaid plan. Some plans have specialized units for particular accounts, such as large employers or government purchasers. This approach allows member services representatives to develop expertise about a manageable number of products or customer groups, enabling them to be more responsive to a population’s needs and to serve it more effectively and efficiently. 
A plan may also divide its member services representatives into work groups that specialize in different means of communication, such as telephone, mail, email, or website. Or they may be divided by function, such as claims or authorization. However, it is not uncommon for all member services representatives to handle many types of needs through different communication channels. 
Goals 
Health plans want employees to demonstrate the following attributes in interacting with members:  

• Competence—providing information, answering questions, completing transactions, and resolving problems accurately and in a timely manner. 
• Strong communication skills—being articulate, listening effectively for expressed and unexpressed needs, and posing questions and responding to members clearly and relevantly. 
• Professional demeanor—being friendly, respectful, courteous, and willing to meet the needs of the individual members, even when those members are upset or angry. 
• Empathy—being able to understand the member’s emotional state and see the situation from her perspective. Empathy and compassion are important because employees often have contact with members who are in emotional crises because their own illness or the illness of a family member. 
Health plans also have to consider cost when designing and delivering member services. To achieve both quality and cost-effectiveness goals, a health plan must manage accessibility, personnel, processes, technology, and performance, as discussed below.  
Accessibility 
Accessibility is the ease and convenience with which members can obtain services. It depends on the communication channels offered (telephone, mail, email, and website), the hours of operation for each channel, and staffing levels.  
Ideally, a health plan would make all channels available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year to maximize convenience. But for channels that require the participation of employees, this is usually not cost-effective. More commonly, member services representatives are available only during the plan’s standard business hours, or sometimes an hour or two before and after standard hours and for limited hours during the weekend. During off-hours, self-service channels such as IVR or websites are available, and while they do not offer the full range of services, they are providing more and more information and transactions.  
For communication channels that involve employees, accessibility is affected by staffing levels. Obviously, the more employees available, the shorter the delay, such as telephone hold time, before a member receives a response. Health plans strive to staff member services at a level that achieves adequate service without leaving employees frequently idle, based on the usual volume of member contacts for different days and times.  
How many member services representatives are needed to achieve an adequate level of 
service for a certain volume of contacts? This depends on representatives’ responsibilities, the nature of the plan, and the availability of self-service options and members’ willingness to use them. A broad scope of responsibilities, an active outreach program, a complex benefit structure, and complicated authorization requirements can increase the number of staff needed. On the other hand, the effective use of computer and telephone technology can improve the productivity and effectiveness of representatives, thereby reducing staffing needs. 
Personnel  
Selecting the right people to be member service representatives and training them appropriately are critical for maintaining high quality and efficiency. Hiring processes and selection tools vary, but health plans generally have both aptitude and attitude requirements. Member services representatives must have an aptitude for learning new information rapidly and using a computer and phone simultaneously, and their attitudes should include friendliness, the desire to help, and comfort in dealing with a steady stream of requests. 
The initial training of representatives is typically extensive, often requiring two or more months before the new employee is ready to handle member contacts independently. New representatives generally receive instruction on a variety of topics and skills, including plan products, procedures, computer and telephone systems, general principles of customer service, sensitivity training, active listening, problem-solving, dispute resolution, and handling angry customers. Ongoing training may introduce new skills or areas of knowledge or refresh existing skills. To help employees assimilate this wide range of knowledge and skills, health plans often use a mix of training methods, such as classroom instruction, simulated contact with members, and on-the-job training with mentoring. 
People who provide customer service all day, every day, are subject to stress and “burnout,” so a plan faces challenges in motivating and retaining member services representatives. Managers often develop recognition and incentive programs to reward staff members for good performance. Many plans conduct contests on an individual or team basis to encourage improved performance. It is also important to provide a supportive, pleasant workplace and opportunities for professional development and career advancement. 
Processes 
There are many member services processes, including fulfilling requests for provider directories, explaining benefits for different types of services, changing a member’s PCP, assisting members with requests for authorization of payment, investigating and responding to claims inquiries, placing welcome calls to new members, and handling complaints. A health plan’s processes must be both effective and efficient—that is, they must achieve their objectives while making good use of company resources, particularly time. Standard processes must be clearly established, employees trained in them, and adherence to them monitored. And because a plan’s products and member needs change over time, processes should be periodically reviewed and modified. 
Technology  
The effective use of technology can enhance the performance of member services personnel and processes. Information management systems provide the information employees need to help members. Communication technology connects the member to the representative or other source of information quickly and accurately. CTI improves employee productivity and accuracy by linking the information and communication systems so that employees have immediate access to information about individual members. CTI systems that record telephone calls for later quality review and track the volume of calls by type facilitate performance management. 
The types of technology and the ways they are applied vary greatly by plan and are continually evolving. IVR systems and websites are being enhanced to enable members to perform some routine transactions. Decreasing the number of routine requests that go to member services representatives increases the availability of representatives for more complex questions and needs. And with the use of online chat, somewhat more complicated matters can be handled online, sometimes more cost-effectively. 
Performance 
Performance management addresses both the quality and the cost-effectiveness of member services. For quality, in addition to the member satisfaction surveys and complaint reports mentioned above, health plans evaluate certain statistics on member contacts, including the following: 
• Turn-around time—the amount of time required to complete a particular member-initiated transaction. 
• First contact resolution rate—the percentage of questions that are answered, requests that are fulfilled, and transactions that are processed and completed at the initial point of contact. First contact resolution is also colloquially called “one and done customer service.” 
• Wait time—the average amount of time that members stay on the telephone before they receive assistance.  
• Call abandonment rate—how often members who are put on hold hang up before receiving assistance. Typically, a shorter wait time results in a lower call abandonment rate. 
• Error rate—the accuracy of information given and transactions processed. 
Many health plans also analyze and even score the quality of individual episodes of contact between members and employees. Managers may monitor live or recorded telephone calls to check for accuracy of information, communication skills, courtesy, and empathy. 
For cost-effectiveness, measures typically focus on the productivity of individuals, teams, or entire units. CTI applications enable plans to monitor and track a variety of productivity indicators, such as the number of telephone calls, emails, or letters handled in a particular time period; the average amount of time spent on each customer contact; and the amount of time spent on administrative duties, such as documentation of contacts, research, and follow-up activities. The first contact resolution rate is an indication of cost-effectiveness as well as of quality, since when members’ needs are met in their first call they do not have to call again.  
Health plans also measure the quality and cost-effectiveness of their websites, by means of member satisfaction surveys, the number of visitors and page views, and path analysis.  
After collecting performance data, managers compare it to service levels, standards set by the plan. For example, the service level for wait time might be that at least 75 percent of calls are answered by a representative within 20 seconds of hold time. Health plans typically base their service levels on company or industry benchmarks, but some purchasers have their own requirements. 
To increase member satisfaction, some health plans are focusing more on improving quality service levels even if this results a worsening of cost-effectiveness service levels. For example, a plan might encourage representatives dealing with complaints to take the time to be empathetic, acknowledge the complaint, explore the issue, and take appropriate action to resolve the complaint during the initial contact, even if this results in the average time required for each contact increasing. 

23 Federal Laws and Regulation 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• tell how federal antitrust and financial services legislation affects health plans, 
• identify and describe the most important federal laws governing employee benefits and health plans, and  summarize the main provisions of HIPAA. 
Like all business entities, health plans are subject to a variety of general business laws and regulations addressing issues such as trade practices, consumer protection, employment and hiring practices, workplace health and safety, contract negotiations, and taxation. In addition, as providers and financers of healthcare services, health plans are subject to laws and regulations specific to healthcare. In this module we examine some of the key federal laws and regulations that affect health plans. In the next module we discuss the latest major piece of federal legislation in this area, the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA), commonly called healthcare reform. And in later modules we study state laws and regulations and laws and regulations related to government healthcare benefit programs.  
General Business Legislation 
The federal government plays an important role in regulating business activities in order to protect the marketplace and consumers. Many federal laws and regulations do not specifically address health plans but nonetheless have a significant impact on their structure and operations. These include antitrust and financial services legislation. 
Antitrust Legislation 
Antitrust laws are designed to protect competition from unlawful restraints of trade, such as price-fixing, market allocation, and bid-rigging. The antitrust laws also prohibit unlawful acquisition or maintenance of monopoly power. The three main federal antitrust laws are these:1 
• The Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 established as national policy the concept of a competitive marketing system. The Act prohibits companies from attempting to monopolize any part of trade or commerce or to engage in contracts, combinations, or conspiracies in restraint of trade. The Act applies to all companies engaged in interstate or foreign commerce.  
• The Clayton Act of 1914 forbids certain actions believed to lead to monopolies. 
These include charging different purchasers different prices for the same product without justification and allowing a distributor to sell a product only if it agrees not to sell competitors’ products. The Clayton Act applies to insurance companies only to the extent that state laws do not regulate such activities.  
• The Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914 established the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and gave it power to work with the Department of Justice to enforce the Clayton Act. The primary function of the FTC is to prevent unfair competition and deceptive business practices, which are presented broadly in the Act. As a result the FTC also pursues violators of the Sherman Antitrust Act.  
Antitrust laws also exist at the state level.  
Antitrust Violations  
Health plans and healthcare providers may be found in violation of antitrust laws if they engage in any of the following activities: 
• Price-fixing involves the agreement by two or more independent entities on the prices that they will charge or pay for services. For example, independent providers generally may not collectively establish the fees that each will charge a health plan. A price-fixing violation need not involve a strict agreement on prices—for instance, it could entail agreement on terms of trade or price levels. 
• A horizontal group boycott occurs when two competitors agree not to do business with another competitor or purchaser. For example, two independent hospitals generally may not agree to refuse to contract with a health plan until the health plan ceases contract negotiations with another hospital. 
• Tying arrangements occur when an organization conditions the sale or purchase of one product or service on the sale or purchase of other products or services. For example, a specialty provider group contracting with a health plan for oncology services generally may be prohibited from requiring the health plan to contract with the group for other services as a condition for receiving the group’s oncology services.  
• Horizontal allocation or division of markets occurs when two or more organizations agree not to compete by dividing geographic marketing areas, product offerings, or customers. For example, two independent companies generally may not split purchasers into two groups and each agree to market their products to only one group.  
Provider contracting is an area in which antitrust issues sometimes arise. Generally speaking, contracting with a select network of providers does not raise antitrust issues (although some states have limited this through any willing provider laws mentioned in Module 13). However, some contract terms, such as exclusive contracts may, raise antitrust issues, depending on the specific facts and circumstances of the market. 
Financial Services Legislation 
In 1999 Congress enacted the Financial Services Modernization Act, referred to as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley (GLB) Act, which allows convergence among the traditionally separate components of the financial services industry—banks, securities firms, and insurance companies. Because health plans finance the delivery of healthcare services, they are also considered part of the financial services industry. 
In broad terms the GLB Act stipulates how the financial services industry may be structured and how it is regulated and supervised. The GLB Act also establishes the rights of customers in regard to the protection of the privacy of personal financial information. 
• All financial institutions must disclose their privacy policies regarding the sharing of nonpublic personal information with both affiliates and third parties. Such disclosure must take place at the time of establishing a customer relationship and not less than annually as long as the relationship continues. 
• They must notify customers of any sharing of nonpublic personal information with nonaffiliated third parties.  
• They must provide customers with an opportunity to opt-out of sharing nonpublic personal information subject to certain limited exceptions.2 
Although the GLB Act does not specifically target healthcare organizations, it may have consequences for these organizations. For example, the GLB Act called on regulators in the states to enact laws governing specific financial services entities, and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) responded by proposing a Privacy of Consumer Financial and Health Information Model Regulation to govern the activities of healthcare organizations and insurers. State regulations based on the NAIC Model Regulation (discussed in the next module) affect the way healthcare organizations, insurers, and other users share protected health information. 
Employee Benefit and Healthcare Legislation 
Several federal laws govern how employers provide healthcare benefits to their employees and how health plans provide insurance coverage or administer employee benefits. We will discuss a number of these laws in this section, and then in a separate section we will examine a major federal healthcare law, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). And as noted earlier, in the next module we will study the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA). 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) 
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) is a broad law that establishes the rights of health plan and pension plan participants, standards for the investment of plan assets, and requirements for the disclosure of plan provisions and funding. ERISA applies to all employer-sponsored or union-sponsored health and pension plans. 
ERISA contains strict reporting and disclosure requirements. Employers and plan fiduciaries—that is, persons or organizations that hold, manage, and have discretionary authority over money belonging to another person or organization—must prepare and distribute summary plan descriptions and file reports with the Department of Labor and the Internal Revenue Service. 
Preemption 
One of the most significant features of ERISA is its preemption provision, stipulating that ERISA generally takes precedence over any state laws that regulate employee welfare benefit plans. However, the preemption provision leaves to the states the authority to regulate insurance, banking, and securities. Consequently, state insurance laws (such as those relating to policy provisions, group size, group eligibility, and mandated benefits) apply to health insurance coverage provided to an employee benefit plan but do not apply directly to the plan. This is true regardless of whether the plan is fully funded (fully insured) or self-funded (self-insured). (Recall that in a self-funded plan the employer, rather than a health plan or insurance company, is financially responsible for paying claims and related expenses.) 
Example: Alpine Corporation is self-funded—that is, it provides health benefits to its employees itself, with no insurance company involvement. Alpine’s health plan is subject to ERISA but not to state laws and regulations governing insurance. On the other hand, Piedmont, Inc. is fully insured; its employee health plan is provided by 
Delta Insurance Company. Piedmont’s involvement in its plan is subject to ERISA, and in addition Delta’s involvement in the plan is subject to state insurance laws and regulations. 
The preemption provision encourages employers to create employee benefit plans by providing a uniform system of regulation and oversight. Furthermore, under ERISA selffunded plans are exempt from state taxes on insurers’ premium revenues.  ERISA’s preemption provision also has important implications for health plans, especially in cases in which an employee raises questions about a plan’s decision not to authorize benefit payment based on medical necessity or appropriateness. Under ERISA, persons who receive healthcare benefits through employee benefit plans must file legal challenges involving coverage decisions or plan administration at the federal level, and ERISA is generally the governing law for such cases. 
For health plans the major advantage of having cases tried at the federal rather than the state level is that, unlike most state laws, ERISA limits damage awards in lawsuits to the cost of the medical services or treatment. It does not allow plan members to receive additional compensatory damages or punitive damages. For example, suppose a plan member files a lawsuit against a health plan in federal court on the grounds that the health plan’s decision to deny payment of benefits on the basis of a lack of medical necessity was improper. If the court determines that benefits were improperly denied, the plan member can recover the denied benefits. The plan member cannot receive monetary awards in compensation for her pain and suffering or awards designed to deter health plans from making inappropriate coverage decisions in the future. 
A number of court cases have challenged health plans’ ability to invoke the ERISA preemption, and proposals have been made to eliminate the preemption or to allow plan members to sue health plans in state court and receive additional compensatory and punitive damages. However, in June 2004 the U.S. Supreme Court issued a decision in the consolidated case of Aetna Health Inc. v. Davila and CIGNA HealthCare of Texas, Inc. v. Calad. The Court’s decision unanimously upheld the ERISA preemption, affirming that Congress intended ERISA’s framework to be the exclusive means of challenging coverage decisions and that individuals cannot challenge such decision in state courts. 
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 (COBRA) 
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 (COBRA) addresses the continuation of group health coverage after an individual’s normal eligibility ends. COBRA requires group health plans to allow employees and dependents to continue their coverage for a certain amount of time following the loss of eligibility, if that loss is caused by a qualifying event. Qualifying events include the termination of employment, reduced work hours, and the death or divorce of an employee.  
Generally, COBRA applies to businesses with 20 or more employees. Many states have similar requirements for businesses with fewer than 20 employees (so-called “mini COBRA” laws). 
The plan administrator of a group health plan must notify covered individuals of their rights under COBRA when they become covered under the plan and when a qualifying event occurs. When a qualifying event occurs, the affected individuals have a specified time within which they can elect to continue their group health benefits.  
Following termination or reduction in hours, an employee, his or her spouse, and dependent children can continue coverage for up to 18 months. If an employee dies or is divorced or legally separated, his or her spouse and dependent children can continue coverage for up to 36 months. A dependent child who ceases to be an eligible dependent under a group health plan can continue coverage for up to 36 months. Once an employee or dependent obtains other group health coverage (for example, through new employment), coverage under COBRA ceases.  
The continuation coverage under COBRA must be identical to the regular coverage under the health plan. The employee normally pays the full cost of the continuation coverage, and the plan administrator may also charge an administrative fee of 2 percent of this cost. Employers are not required to pay any portion of cost. 
HMO Act of 1973 
As you recall from earlier modules, the HMO Act of 1973 and its amendments were instrumental in defining the structure and operations of HMOs and paved the way for HMOs to enter the healthcare market. The HMO Act also sets the requirements HMOs must satisfy to become federally qualified. These requirements cover the following four basic operational areas: 
• Benefits. Federally qualified HMOs must offer a comprehensive benefit package that includes outpatient and inpatient services, unlimited home healthcare benefits, and outpatient behavioral healthcare. HMOs are allowed to deliver these services only through staff or group models, individual practice associations (IPAs), or direct contract arrangements. Benefit structures must require only minimal copayments by members.  
• Enrollment. Qualified HMOs must enroll individuals eligible for group coverage without regard to health status.  
• Financing. Qualified HMOs must have a fiscally sound operation and adequate protections against insolvency.  
• Quality assurance. Qualified HMOs must establish ongoing quality assurance programs that meet the requirements of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). These programs must stress outcomes and performance review of services by physicians and other healthcare professionals.  
Although federal qualification is voluntary and is less important in today's market than in the past, many HMOs still maintain their federal qualification status. 
Other Laws 
A number of other federal laws have an impact on health plans. A few of the most important are shown in Figure 23.1.  
Figure 23.1 
Some Federal Laws That Affect Healthcare Organizations3 
Legislative Act Who Must Comply Protected Class Effect on Healthcare Age 
Discrimination in 
Employment Act 
(ADEA) Employers with 20 or more employees Employees age 40 and older All active employees, regardless of age, must be eligible for the same healthcare coverages, and older employees cannot be charged more than younger ones. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act Employers with 15 or more employees and engaged in interstate 
commerce All employees Discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin is prohibited. Employers must ensure that health plan provisions are not discriminatory.  Pregnancy 
Discrimination Act 
(amendment to 
Civil Rights Act) Employers with 15 or more employees and engaged in interstate 
commerce All employees Employer-sponsored group health plans must provide coverage for pregnancy, childbirth, and related conditions on the same basis as for other medical conditions. Family and 
Medical Leave Act 
(FMLA) Employers with 50 or more employees Employees who 
are ill, need to care 
for a seriously ill family member, or have a new child (including adopted)  Employees must be allowed to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. Employers must continue to make group health benefits available during this leave.  
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) imposes requirements on employer-sponsored and union-sponsored group insurance plans and insurance companies that provide coverage in the group and individual markets. HIPAA provisions are divided into two main categories:  
• Title I contains provisions designed to increase the availability and continuity of healthcare coverage for persons in the individual and group markets. 
• Title II mandates administrative simplification standards designed to protect the confidentiality of health information and facilitate data exchange among entities that finance and deliver healthcare services. 
Almost all states have enacted laws that mirror the requirements of Title I of HIPAA. In states with protections at least as stringent as those of HIPAA, state regulators enforce these state laws. In states that have not developed acceptable provisions, HIPAA protections apply and are enforced by the federal government. 
Title I: Availability and Continuity of Healthcare Coverage  
Individual Coverage Provisions 
Title I of HIPAA guarantees the availability of health insurance coverage for individuals who meet certain qualifications. All such qualified individuals who apply for individual insurance coverage from a private insurer or a state high-risk pool (depending on state law) must be issued a policy automatically, without a medical examination and regardless of preexisting conditions. 
In general, to qualify for HIPAA guaranteed individual issue a person must meet these requirements: She recently had at least 18 months of health coverage (group or individual insurance or a public program such as Medicare or Medicaid), her most recent coverage was group coverage, and she is currently ineligible for either group coverage or coverage under a public program. An individual who loses group coverage because he changes jobs and his new employer does not provide healthcare coverage may also qualify for guaranteed individual issue.  
Group Coverage Provisions  
Title I of HIPAA also includes key group healthcare coverage provisions, including limitations on the use of preexisting condition exclusions, guaranteed availability of coverage for small groups, guaranteed renewability of coverage for all groups, and special enrollment periods for certain individuals (such as newborns or adopted children).  
Title I of HIPAA ensures that individuals are not denied healthcare coverage or charged more for that coverage by a group plan because of their health status (defined to include an individual’s health status, medical conditions, treatment history, claims experience, and genetic information). Group plans and insurers also may not apply waiting periods, cost-sharing mechanisms, or other eligibility rules in a way that that discriminates against individuals on the basis of health status. 
Title I of HIPAA has been amended by subsequent acts that create additional protections for individuals with group healthcare coverage. These include the following: 
• The Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 (MHPA) prohibits group health plans or insurers that provide coverage to businesses with more than 50 employees from applying more restrictive annual and lifetime limits on coverage for mental illness than for physical illness. It should be clarified that MHPA does not require health plans to offer mental health coverage, but it imposes requirements on those plans that do so. This law has been amended to expand the parity requirements to any financial requirement or treatment limitation that may be imposed by a health plan or insurer. 
• The Newborns’ and Mothers’ Health Protection Act of 1996 (NMHPA) specifies that group health plans or group healthcare insurers cannot require that hospital stays following childbirth be shorter than 48 hours for normal deliveries or 96 hours for cesarean births. NMHPA does not require group plans and insurers to offer maternity hospitalization benefits, but it imposes requirements on those group plans and insurers that do so. 
• The Women’s Health and Cancer Rights Act of 1998 (WHCRA) requires health plans (both group and individual coverage) that offer medical and surgical benefits for mastectomy to provide coverage for reconstructive surgery following mastectomy. Again, the law does not require group plans and insurers to offer mastectomy benefits, but it imposes requirements on those that do so.  
Title II: Administrative Simplification 
Title II of HIPAA requires the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to develop administrative simplification standards. Some of these are designed to standardize electronic healthcare transactions, such as claims and eligibility inquiries. Others are intended to ensure the privacy and security of individually identifiable health information (health information that, by itself or in conjunction with other available information, identifies an individual). HHS has developed a number of regulations that establish Title II administrative simplification standards. 
These standards apply to health plans, healthcare providers that use electronic transactions, and healthcare clearinghouses. A healthcare clearinghouse is a private or public entity that converts provider data into the correct format for each health plan and converts health plan data into the appropriate provider format. The clearinghouse also sorts and transmits all data. Billing services, repricing companies, community health management information systems, and value added networks may be healthcare clearinghouses.  
Electronic Transaction Standards and Code Sets  
As required by HIPAA, HHS has developed regulations that standardize the form and content of electronic healthcare transactions. Transactions subject to these standards include: healthcare claims or encounter data, health plan eligibility inquiries and responses, provider referrals and authorizations, claims status inquiries and responses, health plan enrollment and disenrollment requests, claim payment and remittance, health plan premium payment, coordination of benefits information, and healthcare claims attachments.  
HHS has identified existing industry format standards and code sets, such as the ICD-9CM diagnosis codes and CPT-4 procedure codes, that must be used when conducting electronic healthcare transactions. HHS has also created a new system in which all healthcare providers apply for a National Provider Identifier (NPI) to be used for electronic transactions, replacing the various provider identifiers used by different health plans.  
Privacy and Security Standards  
HIPAA requires HHS to develop standards to ensure the privacy and security of health information. These standards control the use and disclosure of health information by health plans, healthcare providers, and healthcare clearinghouses, and they provide individuals with certain rights with respect to their information. The privacy standards include the following rules: 
• Healthcare providers must generally obtain an individual’s written consent to use protected health information. Health plans, healthcare providers, and clearinghouses may use or disclose healthcare information for their own treatment, payment, or operations without obtaining the individual’s consent.  
• The transmission of individually identifiable health information for purposes other than medical treatment, payment, or healthcare operations without the patient’s written authorization is generally prohibited. 
• Patients are allowed to access their medical records and request amendment of incorrect or incomplete medical information.  
• Patients are allowed to request that restrictions be placed on the accessibility and use of protected health information.  
• Healthcare providers, healthcare clearinghouses, and health plans must institute privacy and security policies and procedures and workforce training programs.  
• Healthcare providers, health plans, and healthcare clearinghouses must institute privacy protections in contracts with any business that uses health information on their behalf. 
HIPAA security standards are designed to prevent unintended access to protected health information and mandate features entities must include in their operations to ensure that such information is secure. These features include administrative procedures and physical devices and mechanisms to protect data integrity and confidentiality. The security standards are “scalable”—that is, the procedures and mechanisms used by a particular entity may vary depending on the size, structure, 

security needs, and business requirements of the entity. The HIPAA Privacy Rule requires covered entities to: 
• ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of all electronic protected health information (EPHI) that the covered entity creates, receives, maintains, or transmits;  
• protect against any reasonably anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such information;  
• protect against any reasonably anticipated uses or disclosures of such information that are not permitted or required by the Privacy Rule; and  
• ensure compliance by its workforce and any business that contracts with the covered entity.  
Conclusion 
There are many federal laws that have a significant impact on health plans, and we have looked briefly at some of the most important: 
• Under antitrust laws, health plans must not engage in activities that restrain a free, competitive marketplace, such as price-fixing and market allocation. 
• Under financial services legislation, plans must protect the privacy of consumers’ financial information. 
• ERISA governs employer-sponsored health plans, establishing participant rights, investment standards, and disclosure requirements. ERISA also exempts employer plans (but not insurers) from state regulation. 
• COBRA gives employees and dependents certain rights to continue employersponsored health coverage for a time after they lose eligibility.  
• The HMO Act of 1973 sets standards for HMOs that choose to be federally qualified. 
• Under various laws, employers may not discriminate among employees based on race, age, gender, and similar factors in regard to health coverage. 
• HIPAA contains many provisions designed to increase the availability and continuity of healthcare coverage, protect health information, and facilitate data exchange. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  Adapted from Sharon B. Allen, Dennis W. Goodwin, and Jennifer W. Herrod, Life and Health Insurance Marketing, 2nd Ed., LOMA, 1998. Used with permission, all rights reserved.  
Page 
                                                                                                                                                 
2  Financial Services Modernization Act (Gramm-Leach-Bliley), Summary of Provisions, www.senate.gov/. 3  Adapted from Harriett. E. Jones and Dani L. Long, Principles of Insurance: Life, Health, and Annuities, 2nd Ed., LOMA, 1999. Used with permission, all rights reserved. 
Page 
24 The Affordable Care Act 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• list the main elements of the new healthcare system to be created by the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA);  summarize ACA’s requirements for individuals, employers, and health plans; and 
• describe the subsidies and exchanges to be created by ACA to help people afford health coverage. 
In March 2010 Congress enacted the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), often referred to as the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and commonly called simply healthcare reform. This legislation will have a major impact on health plans. In earlier modules we mentioned some of the Act’s provisions relevant to aspects of health plans under discussion, and in this module we offer a very broad overview of the Act.  
An Important Note 
 The discussion of ACA in this course is not comprehensive. We briefly describe in general terms the main components of this very complex and lengthy legislation, with a focus on the elements that affect health plans. We do not cover all of the provisions of the legislation, which is hundreds of pages long, and for the provisions that we do address, we do not include all details and exceptions.  
 The new system and rules are evolving. Many details and important matters still remain to be decided as the law is interpreted, clarified, and implemented over the next few years. This module is based on what is known in late 2010. Students are encouraged to visit our website (www.ahip.org.) for developments. The New Healthcare Financing System 
ACA creates a new healthcare system based on the following elements: 
• Most people will be required to have health coverage or pay a tax penalty. 
• To make health coverage more available, employers will be given incentives to sponsor it, in the form of taxes and tax credits. 
• Also to ensure that coverage is available, health insurance exchanges will be established through which individuals and employers can purchase policies from insurers. 
• To make health coverage more affordable, government subsidies will be provided to some people to help them pay premiums and cost-sharing. 

• The poorest people will be covered by the Medicaid program. As will be discussed in a module that follows, Medicaid eligibility will be expanded to people who are not currently eligible but whose income is below a certain level. 
• To ensure that health coverage adequately meets people’s needs, several new requirements will apply to health plans.  
In addition, there are a number of provisions that will affect taxation, Medicare, long-term care, and HSAs, FSAs, and HRAs, as well as new regulations and programs designed to improve the quality of care and hold down costs. Most of the major components of this new system will become operational in 2014, but some provisions go into effect earlier or later.  
The Individual Mandate 
As of 2014 U.S. citizens and resident aliens will be required to have health coverage that meets minimum standards or pay a federal income tax penalty (with some exceptions). This penalty will be phased in from 2014 to 2016, at which time the annual amount will be the greater of $695 per person or 2.5 percent of income (modified adjusted gross income or MAGI). For families the flat penalty amount is $695 for each family member 18 and older and half that for each child under 18, but no family will have to pay more than three times the per-person amount ($2,085). It should be emphasized that the money paid is a tax penalty—it is not a health insurance premium, and it does not entitle the payer to any health coverage. 
Employer-Sponsored Coverage 
The new rules for employers do not require them to sponsor health coverage for employees but are designed to give them incentives to do so. We will not provide the details of these rules here, but in effect, as of 2014 employers with 50 or more employees will generally have to either sponsor coverage for their employees or pay fees to help defray the government’s cost of subsidizing coverage for them. Also, even if an employer sponsors a health plan, if an employee finds getting coverage through an exchange more advantageous than enrolling in the employer’s plan, the employer must pay a fee to help defray the government’s cost.  
Employers with fewer than 50 employees pay no fees. Employers who have no more than 25 employees and meet some other requirements are eligible for tax credits to help them sponsor coverage.  
Employer-sponsored plans will be required to provide a minimum benefit package and meet some other requirements.  
Exchanges 
To ensure that those required to have health coverage can obtain it, the government will sponsor American Health Benefit Exchanges through which individuals can buy policies from insurers and Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) exchanges for employers. These exchanges will provide information to consumers about available health plans and facilitate enrollment. They will become operational and open to individuals and small employers (100 or fewer employees) by January 1, 2014. Beginning in 2017 states can allow large employers to participate as well.  
Exchanges will be established and run by the states, but the federal government will provide assistance and funding in setting them up, and if a state does not create an exchange the federal government will establish one for it. States can join together to form regional exchanges, and more than one exchange can operate in a state, as long as the geographical areas served by different exchanges do not overlap. The exchanges will be administered by a government agency or nonprofit organization. 
There will be an essential benefits package that is the minimum a health plan offered through the exchanges or (as of 2014) in the individual and small group market can provide. Plans meeting this minimum standard are referred to as qualified plans. A qualified plan must cover a comprehensive set of healthcare services and may charge no more than a maximum annual amount in cost-sharing. A qualified plan must also have a minimum actuarial value of 60 percent—that is, it must pay at least 60 percent of the cost of the healthcare services it covers, so that the portion of costs that plan members must pay in cost-sharing payments (deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance) is limited.  
Health plans already existing as of March 23, 2010, are exempt from this requirement and are called grandfathered plans. However, if certain changes (still to be specified) are made to an existing plan, it may lose its grandfathered status. 
In addition to instituting a basic qualified plan, to facilitate the comparison of plans, ACA establishes categories of plans based on benefits and cost-sharing. All qualified plans meet the requirements outlined above, and they must match one of the following categories: bronze plan (actuarial value of 60 percent), silver plan (70 percent), gold plan (80 percent), platinum plan (90 percent), or catastrophic plan. Catastrophic coverage is available only to individuals 30 and younger and people exempt from the individual mandate to have health coverage. Subsidies for Individuals 
So that people required to have health coverage can afford it, premium subsidies in the form of income tax credits are available to those with income below 400 percent of the federal poverty level who purchase coverage through an exchange. Subsidies to help pay deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance will also be available for some of those who obtain coverage through the exchange.  Requirements for Health Plans 
As of 2014 new health plans, whether offered through an exchange or not, will have to match one of the benefit-based categories outlined above under exchanges (bronze, silver, etc.). Grandfathered plans are exempt. In addition, the following requirements apply to all health plans (including grandfathered plans): 
• Lifetime limits on benefits are prohibited (2010).  
• Annual limits on benefits are restricted as of 2010 and will be prohibited in 2014. 
• Medical loss ratio and rebates (2011). If the amount a plan spends on healthcare (its medical loss ratio) is less than 85 percent of the amount it receives in premiums, the plan must pay the difference to members in rebates. (The level for the individual and small group market is 80 percent, to reflect higher administrative costs.) 
• Guaranteed issue (2014). In the exchanges and the individual and small group market, policies must be offered on a guaranteed issue basis (without consideration of an individual’s current health, medical history, or family medical history). 
• Preexisting conditions. Benefits may not be excluded or limited for preexisting conditions (for children in 2010, for adults in 2014). 
• Premium rating (2014). Different premium rates can be based only on age, geographical area, family size, and tobacco use. Age-based rating is limited to a ratio of 3 to 1, and the increase for tobacco use can be no more than 50 percent. 
• Guaranteed renewable (2014). In the exchanges and the individual and small group market, policies must be guaranteed renewable. 
• Dependent coverage (2010). Plans with dependent coverage must provide it to children up to age 26. 
• Deductibles in the small group market generally cannot exceed $2,000 (individual) or $4,000 (family) (2014).  
• Rescission (2010). Insurers may not rescind coverage (annul a policy) except in cases of fraud. 
It should be clarified that these requirements apply to broad-based health coverage, not insurance products such as stand-alone vision or dental benefits, disability income insurance, or long-term care insurance. Taxation 
We have discussed the income tax penalties on individuals who do not have health coverage and the fees levied on employers. There are many other tax changes, the most important of which are these: 
• Tax on high-value (“Cadillac”) health plans (2018). If an employer-sponsored health plan has a value greater than $10,200 (individual) or $27,500 (family), an excise tax of 40 percent of the value in excess of these amounts will be levied on the insurer (or the employer or plan administrator for self-insured plans). This tax will be passed on to employers and employees in the form of higher premiums and is intended to give them an incentive not to choose such plans. 
• Medicare taxes on high-income taxpayers (2013). To strengthen Medicare finances, people with high incomes will be required to contribute more to the program. These people will pay a higher Medicare employment tax rate on their earnings above a certain level as well as a new tax on unearned (investment) income.  
• Taxes on health insurers. Substantial new taxes on health insurance companies will be phased in from 2014 to 2018. 
• Taxes on drug and medical device manufacturers. As of 2011 a fee will levied on manufacturers and importers of brand-name prescription drugs, and as of 2013 an excise tax of 2.3 percent will apply to the sale price of medical devices (but not glasses, contact lenses, hearing aids, and other items generally purchased by consumers for their own use).  
Quality and Cost 
ACA includes a wide array of regulations and programs designed to improve the quality of healthcare and contain costs. Goals include: 
• simplifying and standardizing health insurance administration, 
• supporting research in the comparative effectiveness of medical procedures and identifying and promoting best practices,  fostering preventive healthcare and wellness programs,   investing in the education and training of healthcare personnel,  promoting the use of generic drugs,  
• making it easier and less costly for insurers to sell coverage in multiple states by streamlining the regulatory process through national plans and a compact among states,  combating fraud and abuse,   encouraging the development of alternative medical malpractice laws, and 
• creating an office of consumer health insurance assistance to serve as an 
advocate for consumers. 
 

25 State Laws and Regulation 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 identify the key requirements of the NAIC HMO Model Act,  list the main state laws governing other (non-HMO) entities, and   list the main NAIC models for health plan accountability. 
In the last module we discussed various federal laws that govern health plans in their roles as business entities and as participants in the delivery and financing of healthcare. But the bulk of health plan regulation exists at the state level, and although the new federal Affordable Care Act (ACA) will have an enormous impact on health plans, the states will continue to take the leading role in regulating them. Moreover, as the provisions of ACA go into effect in the coming years, states will be taking regulatory and administrative actions to implement elements of the Act and address issues and problems that arise in relation to it. 
Because health plans evolved within the indemnity insurance environment, many of the provisions of early health plan laws mirrored traditional indemnity insurance laws. As prepaid health plans emerged, state regulatory authorities faced the task of developing new laws that more appropriately addressed health plans. Two state agencies shared much of the responsibility for this: the insurance department and the health department. The insurance department, with the support of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), handles most of the regulation related to financial issues, and the health department addresses healthcare delivery and quality assurance issues. 
Regulation of HMOs 
Before passage of the federal HMO Act of 1973, health insurance plans were subject to laws designed to regulate the operations of insurance companies or hospital and medical service corporations, and these laws often restricted the development of HMOs. The federal HMO Act encouraged states to develop statutes that would facilitate rather than hinder the establishment and operation of HMOs. One of the most important steps in this movement was the NAIC’s development of its Health Maintenance Organization Model Act (HMO Model Act). Today almost every state has laws that address HMOs, many patterned after the Model Act. 
The NAIC HMO Model Act regulates HMO operations in two critical areas: financial responsibility and healthcare delivery. The Model Act addresses financial responsibility through licensing requirements and financial standards. It addresses healthcare delivery by establishing requirements for network adequacy, quality assurance, and grievance procedures. The Act also includes filing and reporting requirements.  
Financial Responsibility Requirements 
As you recall from an earlier module, an HMO that wishes to begin operations in a state is required to obtain a certificate of authority (COA), or license, from that state. The COA provides proof that the organization has met the state’s licensing requirements and has demonstrated that it is dependable, fiscally sound, and able to meet specified quality standards.  
HMOs are also required to meet financial standards related to net worth or capital, financial reporting, liquidity, and accounting and investment practices. For example, in order to obtain a COA, an HMO must have an initial net worth of $1.5 million, and thereafter it must maintain a minimum net worth specified by the state. These financial standards are designed to protect plan members from the risk of an HMO becoming insolvent. Insolvency occurs when an organization’s assets or resources are not adequate to cover its debts and obligations. An HMO is considered to be insolvent when it does not have enough resources to pay for its members’ current and future healthcare needs.  
If the state insurance commissioner finds that an HMO is or is likely to become insolvent, the commissioner can intervene by monitoring a corrective plan developed by the HMO, reducing the volume of new business the HMO can accept, taking steps to reduce the HMO’s expenses, or prohibiting the HMO from writing new business for a specified period of time. If these interventions are inadequate, the HMO Model Act grants the state commissioner the authority to take over the management of the HMO. In some cases, HMO insolvency can be handled through administrative supervision, which involves placing HMO operations under the direction and control of the insurance commissioner or a person appointed by him or her. Such action can be ordered by the commissioner or agreed to by the commissioner and the HMO.  
If more serious action is necessary, the HMO can be placed in receivership. Receivership is a situation in which the commissioner, acting for a state court, takes control of and administers an HMO’s assets and liabilities. The primary goal of receivership is to rehabilitate the HMO—that is, return the organization to normal operation. In this case, the HMO’s business continues to exist. If rehabilitation is not possible, the commissioner can liquidate the organization by transferring all of the its business and assets to other carriers or by selling its assets to satisfy its obligations. Liquidation terminates the HMO’s business. 
Healthcare Delivery Requirements 
The HMO Model Act focuses on three key aspects of healthcare delivery:  
• Network adequacy is typically measured by the geographic distribution of providers within the HMO’s service area and by the availability of adequate numbers and types of providers based on enrollment. State regulators determine network adequacy by examining the description of the HMO’s service area and the list of network providers’ names, addresses, and license numbers included in the HMO’s COA application.  
• Quality assurance requirements focus on an HMO’s procedures for facilitating the delivery of healthcare services to plan enrollees. The Model Act requires that healthcare delivery procedures follow reasonable standards for quality of care and be consistent with prevailing professionally recognized standards of medical practice. An HMO’s quality assurance program must include a statement of the HMO’s goals and objectives for evaluating and improving enrollees’ health status; documentation of all quality assurance activities; and a system for periodically reporting program results to the HMO’s board of directors, its providers, and regulators. 
• Grievance procedures. The Model Act requires HMOs to maintain records of all complaints received by the organization and to make these records available to the appropriate regulatory authority for review. In addition, the Model Act requires HMOs to file a description of the internal procedures they follow to resolve member complaints.  
Reporting Requirements 
The NAIC HMO Model Act requires HMOs to satisfy a variety of filing and reporting requirements. For example, HMOs must submit copies of proposed provider and group contract forms, evidence of coverage forms, and premium rate methodology as part of the COA application process. Changes to any of these forms must also be filed with the appropriate state agency. In addition, HMOs must file annual reports with state regulators describing their finances and operations. Annual reports must be filed on state-approved forms and verified by at least two of the HMO’s principal officers.  
To protect the interests of HMO enrollees, the Model Act authorizes state insurance departments to conduct periodic examinations to verify an HMO’s compliance with financial, service delivery, and reporting requirements. HMO operations, quality assurance programs, and provider networks are examined at least once every three years.  
Regulation of Other Entities 
Preferred Provider Arrangements 
In addition to HMO laws, all states have laws to regulate health plans that include preferred provider arrangements. These laws define a preferred provider arrangement (PPA) as a contract between a healthcare insurer and a healthcare provider or group of providers who agree to provide services to persons covered under the contract. Preferred provider organizations (PPOs) and exclusive provider organizations (EPOs) are examples of health plans that include a preferred provider arrangement.  
Laws governing PPAs of course vary by state, and they also differ according to the structure of a health plan. For instance, an HMO offering a POS product and a PPO both provide enhanced network benefits and lesser non-network benefits, but a state may regulate the HMO under its HMO law and the PPO under state insurance laws. Likewise, a traditional HMO and an EPO may both exclude benefits for out-of-network care, but the HMO falls under the HMO law and the EPO under insurance laws. This can be important, as differences between a state’s HMO law and its insurance code can result in differences in premiums, covered services, and benefit levels, even though the product concept is the same. Finally, it should be noted that a significant number of 
PPAs are self-funded employer plans, which are not subject to state insurance laws.  
In an effort to establish minimum standards for preferred provider arrangements and the health plans that include these arrangements, the NAIC has proposed a Preferred 
Provider Arrangement Model Act (PPA Model Act). This model requires PPAs to: 
 clearly identify any differences in benefit levels for services of preferred providers and non-preferred providers,  establish the amount and manner of payment to preferred providers,   include mechanisms for minimizing the cost of the health plan, and  provide plan members with reasonable access to covered services.  
In addition, health plans under a PPA must include an adequate number of preferred providers to deliver covered services and provide benefits for emergency care by a nonpreferred provider if needed. Although only a few states have enacted laws based closely on the NAIC PPA Model Act, most states have enacted legislation to regulate PPOs.  
Point-of-Service Products 
State laws regulating other types of health plans are far less uniform than those governing HMOs and PPAs. For instance, state statutes traditionally prohibited HMOs from offering point-of-service (POS) products, but recent pressure from consumers has led to an increasing number of state mandates requiring existing HMOs to offer a POS option. In some states an HMO can offer a POS product directly, but in others it can offer it only as an indemnity wraparound policy—an out-of-plan product that a health plan offers through an agreement with an insurance company. The introduction of POS products has created a regulatory challenge for most states, because these products have features of both HMOs and indemnity insurance and as such they can be subject to either state HMO laws or state insurance laws. 
Utilization Review 
Entities that perform utilization review (UR) are called utilization review organizations (UROs). They can be in-house departments of health plans or external entities. Utilization review is generally subject to regulation if the recommendations affect a health plan’s decision to cover a specific service.  
Although UR laws vary widely, most states require UROs to be licensed and to obtain some form of certification. For a URO to be certified, its personnel must satisfy certain criteria related to education, training, and experience. UROs must also typically meet standards for accessibility and confidentiality of medical information. UROs that fail to comply with state laws are subject to fines and penalties levied.  
The NAIC has adopted a Utilization Review Model Act. Provisions of the Model Act specify that all health carriers that provide or perform utilization review must: 
• implement a written utilization review program (including data sources, review criteria, and appeals processes) and report annually on the program; 
• use and make publicly available upon request documented clinical review 
criteria; 
• use qualified health professionals, including clinical peers where appropriate, to administer the program;   establish written procedures for adverse determinations and appeals;   not tie reviewer compensation to the number of adverse determinations;  
• cover, without preauthorization, emergency services necessary to screen and stabilize a covered person, if a prudent layperson would believe an emergency exists. Health carriers are required to pay noncontracting providers for such services if a prudent layperson would believe that using a contracting provider would result in delays that would worsen the emergency or if federal, state, or local law requires the use of a specific provider. 
Third-Party Administrators1 
Third-party administrators (TPAs) are companies that provide administrative services to health plans, employers, or other plan sponsors. Some of these administrative services, such as underwriting and claims, are classified as insurance activities and as such are subject to state regulation.  
Most of the state laws regulating TPAs are modeled on the NAIC Third-Party Administrator (TPA) Model Act. These laws typically specify that to act as a TPA an organization must obtain a certificate of authority from the state insurance department designating the organization as a TPA. A TPA must also maintain, as a business record for each client organization, a written agreement describing the duties the TPA will perform, the compensation it will receive, and the standards that pertain to the business the TPA will administer.  
Regardless of the terms of any TPA agreement, the health plan remains responsible for determining all premium rates, benefits, underwriting criteria, and claim payment procedures, and for ensuring that the plan is administered properly. The TPA serves primarily as a fiduciary. As such, it must hold all funds it receives on behalf of the health plan in trust and must provide the plan with an accounting of all transactions performed on behalf of the health plan. The TPA is required to notify the state insurance department of any material changes in ownership, control, or qualification for a certificate of authority.  
The TPA Model Act specifies mandatory suspension or revocation of a TPA’s certificate of authority if the TPA is financially unsound, is using practices that are harmful to insured persons or the public, or has failed to pay any judgment rendered against it within 60 days. The state insurance department has discretionary authority to suspend or revoke a TPA’s certificate of authority if the TPA has violated the state’s insurance laws; refused to be examined or to produce its records for examination; refused, without just cause, to pay claims or perform services under its agreement; or been placed under suspension or revocation in another state. 
 
Health Plan Accountability 
The NAIC has developed several health plan accountability model acts, paving the way for the creation of state statutes. 
Credentialing 
The NAIC’s Health Care Professional Credentialing Verification Model Act specifies requirements that health plans must satisfy to ensure that network providers meet minimum standards of professional qualification. These requirements include the following: 
• verification of the credentials of all contracted healthcare professionals in accordance with written procedures that must be disclosed, on written request, to any applying healthcare professional;  
• collection of a minimum set of credentialing information by either primary or secondary verification, with recredentialing required every three years; and 
• establishment of a process by which providers can review and correct credentialing information. 
Although credentialing is required for all health plans, meeting a plan’s credentialing criteria does not ensure a provider’s selection by that plan.  
Quality Management 
Legislatures continue to express interest in creating, expanding, or rewriting quality standards for health plans, and numerous states have enacted laws, many of which are patterned after the NAIC’s Quality Assessment and Improvement Model Act. This model requires health plans to establish and report on systems for assessing the quality of care and services they provide. In particular, quality assessment laws require health plans to:  
• establish an appropriate system for assessing the quality of healthcare services provided by each type of network, 
• report to the appropriate licensing authorities any problems that would offer grounds for provider termination, 
• file a written description of quality assessment programs with the state insurance commissioner or the secretary of the state health department, 
• describe quality programs to consumers through marketing and educational materials, and  meet specified data confidentiality requirements.  
The model also requires closed plans to implement a quality improvement program to identify the best and worst outcomes and utilization patterns and the providers responsible for each. Closed plans are defined as health plans that require covered persons to use participating providers. Closed plans are required to develop treatment protocols, practice guidelines, and other quality improvement strategies and to report annually on the impact of these strategies. 
Network Adequacy 
The NAIC’s Health Plan Network Adequacy Model Act requires all health plans to:  
• meet specified adequacy and accessibility standards; 
• hold covered persons harmless against provider collections and provide continued coverage for uncompleted treatment in the event of plan insolvency;  develop standards to be used in the selection of providers; 
• adhere to specified disclosure requirements, including 60-day written notice to providers before terminating a contract without cause and 15-day notice to patients of a provider’s contract termination; and 
• file written access plans and sample contract forms with the state insurance commissioner.  
In addition, under this Model Act plans may not: 
• induce providers to deliver less than medically necessary care,   prevent providers from discussing treatment options with patients, or   penalize providers for whistleblower activities against plans. 
Grievance Procedures  
The NAIC’s Health Carrier Grievance Procedure Model Act calls for the development of written procedures for handling subscriber grievances. All health carriers are required to maintain an internal first-level grievance review and a second-level review panel and to allow covered persons to review relevant information, attend review panel meetings, and have representation.  
Privacy of Information 
As you recall from the last module, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley (GLB) Act called on the states to enact laws governing specific financial services entities, and the NAIC responded by proposing a Privacy of Consumer Financial and Health Information Model Regulation to govern the activities of healthcare organizations and insurers. Whereas the GLB Act focused on the use and disclosure of nonpublic financial information, the NAIC’s Model Act covers personally identifiable health information as well. Rules governing the use and disclosure of health information are included under Article V of the Model Regulation and describe:  
• when authorization is required for disclosure of nonpublic personal health information, 
• the procedures a consumer may use to opt out of otherwise permissible information-sharing between health plans and other related business entities,  requirements for a valid authorization, and  
• conditions under which authorization requests and authorization forms must be delivered to customers. 
This model applies to all licensees of the state insurance department, including health plans. The model does not preempt or supersede any existing state laws related to medical records or the privacy of health or insurance information. 
Note 
                                                 
1  Adapted from Harriett E. Jones, Regulatory Compliance: Companies, Producers, and Operations (LOMA, © 1998), p. 63. Used with permission; all rights reserved. 

26 Government Programs: Medicare 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
 describe the Medicare program, including its component parts and the options available to beneficiaries;   tell how the Medicare Advantage program has developed;   identify the different types of Medicare Advantage plans; and  describe Medigap policies. 
The federal government is a payor and purchaser of healthcare benefits. It provides health benefits directly or through grants, and it operates programs that serve populations such as the elderly and disabled (Medicare), low-income people (Medicaid), federal employees (FEHB), and active and retired members of the uniformed services and their dependents (TRICARE). The federal government also plays an important role in healthcare by maintaining standards for Medicare healthcare providers, federally qualified HMOs, and health plans for federal employees, as well as quality standards for hospitals, clinical laboratories, and many other healthcare entities. Most federal healthcare functions are under the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), which includes the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).  
This module examines the Medicare program, with special attention to the Medicare Advantage program, through which individuals can opt to receive Medicare coverage from a private-sector health plan. It also takes a look at Medicare supplement insurance. For all topics we note changes made by recent healthcare reform legislation. 
In this module Medicare dollar amounts for 2010 are used. (They are adjusted annually for inflation.) 
Medicare 
Medicare is a federal program that was established under Title XVIII of the Social Security Act of 1965. It is social insurance that provides benefits for hospital care, medical services, and other healthcare expenses. It is available to persons 65 or older; people under 65 with severe, long-term disabilities; and persons with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) or ALS: 
Medicare is an entitlement program—for individuals who meet the qualifications, benefits are a right. Medicare provides extensive coverage, but it does not cover all healthrelated expenses, and beneficiaries must pay significant deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance. Therefore individuals may want to supplement Medicare with private-sector insurance (discussed below). 
Medicare consists of Parts A, B, C, and D: 
• Medicare originally had two components: Part A (hospital coverage) and Part B 
(medical coverage). Parts A and B together are referred to as “original Medicare” or “traditional Medicare.” Original Medicare is traditional fee-forservice coverage. 
• IN 1997 Part C was added. This is the Medicare Advantage (MA) program, which gives beneficiaries the option of obtaining Part A and Part B coverage (and some other benefits) through a Medicare-approved private-sector health plan. Most MA plans are managed care plans. 
• In 2006 Part D (prescription drug coverage) was added. Medicare beneficiaries choose whether to participate in Part D, and those who do pay an additional monthly premium. Part D benefits are provided by Medicare-approved privatesector prescription drug plans (PDPs) and by most Medicare Advantage plans. 
A majority of Medicare beneficiaries receive coverage though original Medicare, but over 11 million (about 24 percent) choose Medicare Advantage (2010).1 A majority of beneficiaries are also enrolled in Part D, either through a PDP or an MA plan. 
Medicare Part A 
Coverage 
Medicare Part A includes benefits for the following:  
• Inpatient hospital care. There is a large deductible ($1,100) per benefit period (usually a hospital stay), large daily copayments ($275) after 60 days, and a limit of 90 days per benefit period (except for 60 lifetime reserve days, for which there is a daily copayment of $550). 
• Skilled nursing facility care following hospitalization. Skilled care must be medically necessary for recovery from an acute illness or injury, and other conditions must be met. There are a limit of 100 days per benefit period and large daily copayments ($137.50) after day 20. 
• Home healthcare following hospitalization or nursing facility care. Intermittent skilled care must be medically necessary for recovery from an acute illness or injury, and other conditions must be met. There is no cost-sharing, but there is a limit of 100 home visits. 
• Hospice care, provided to terminally ill persons. Only small copayment and coinsurance amounts for a few items are charged. 
Eligibility and Premiums 
Part A is provided without charge to U.S. citizens and certain resident aliens who are 65 or older and receiving or eligible for Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board (RRB) retirement benefits, as well as most persons participating in retirement programs for federal, state, or local government employees instead of Social Security. Other people 65 or older may enroll in Part A, but they must pay a premium (up to $461 a month). As a general rule, those who paid into the Medicare system while they were working by means of FICA payroll deductions for at least a minimal amount of time (or whose spouses did so) do not pay a premium, while those who did not must pay. 
Medicare Part A is also available to disabled persons under 65 who meet certain criteria. They must qualify for Social Security or RRB disability benefits, which means that their disability must be total—that is, so severe that they are unable to engage in any substantially gainful work. And the disability must be long-term—they must have received SS or RRB disability benefits for at least 24 months. Because of these restrictive conditions, many disabled persons do not qualify. 
Individuals of any age who suffer permanent kidney failure (end-stage renal disease, or 
ESRD) or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease) are also eligible. To qualify on the basis of a disability, ESRD, or ALS, a person (or his or her spouse) must have paid into the Medicare system for at least minimal amount of time while working. Those who have not done so may not enroll by paying a premium, as can those 65 or older. Finally, healthcare reform extends Medicare eligibility to people who have developed certain health conditions as a result of living in an area where they were exposed to environmental health hazards. 
Funding 
Medicare Part A is funded primarily by payroll taxes on working people and their employers. Currently, employees and employers each pay 7.65 percent of wages in FICA taxes, of which 6.2 percent is for Social Security and 1.45 percent is for Medicare. While Social Security taxes are levied only on wages up to $106,800 per year, Medicare taxes apply to all wages, even those above this level. A self-employed person pays both the employer and the employee portion, for a total of 15.3 percent. 
Healthcare reform makes two important changes to this system beginning in tax year 2013: 
• Tax increase on earned income. Those with annual employment earnings above $200,000 (individual) or $250,000 (couple) will pay a higher Medicare employment tax rate on their earnings above that level (2.35 percent instead of the usual 1.45 percent). The employer contribution (1.45 percent) will not be increased. These thresholds will not be adjusted for inflation, so over time more people will be liable for this increased rate. 
• Tax on unearned income. There will be a 3.8 percent Medicare tax on unearned income (investment income such as interest, dividends, and capital gains) of high-worth individuals, estates, and trusts. For individuals this tax will apply to net investment income or to modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) in excess of $200,000 (individual) or $250,000 (couples), whichever is less. 
Medicare Part B 
Coverage 
Medicare Part B covers a wide array of services and supplies, including physician and surgeon services, services provided by some other healthcare practitioners, outpatient medical and surgical services, emergency room and ambulance services, laboratory services, therapy, mental healthcare, durable medical equipment, and others. Healthcare reform adds several preventive care services to Part B coverage, including annual wellness visits, various disease screenings, personalized disease prevention plans, cardiac rehabilitation programs (including exercise, education, and counseling), an EKG, and others. 
With a few limited exceptions, original Medicare does not pay benefits for dental care and dentures, vision care and eyeglasses, hearing exams and hearing aids, foot care and orthopedic shoes, chiropractic services, healthcare delivered outside the United States, and some other health-related services and products. In the past Medicare coverage of preventive care was fairly limited, but it has been expanded in recent years, and as noted above, healthcare reform continues this trend. As a result, although there are still a few screenings and diagnostic tests that are not covered, this is no longer a major coverage gap. 
For most Part B services and products beneficiaries must pay an annual deductible ($155) and 20 percent coinsurance. Healthcare reform eliminates this cost-sharing for most (but not all) preventive care. There is currently 45 percent coinsurance for outpatient mental healthcare, but from 2011 through 2014 this will be gradually lowered to 20 percent. Under both Part A and Part B, beneficiaries must pay for the first three pints of blood (if it is not donated by a blood bank, as is usually the case).  
Eligibility and Premiums 
All U.S. citizens (and certain resident aliens) 65 or older have the option of receiving 
Medicare Part B. Persons with disabilities, ESRD, or ALS who are eligible for Medicare Part A are also eligible for Part B. Because Part B covers important healthcare services not covered by Part A, almost all those enrolled in Part A choose Part B as well. 
All Part B enrollees pay a monthly premium. Most people—those with annual income at or below $85,000 (individual) or $170,000 (couple)—pay the standard premium, while those with greater income pay higher amounts based on their income. In 2010 the standard premium is $110.30, but only new enrollees and those not receiving Social Security pay this amount; most people continue to pay the 2009 amount of $96.40.2 Under healthcare reform, the income level above which beneficiaries must pay a higherthan-standard Part B premium will be frozen from 2011 through 2019, so that as incomes rise more beneficiaries will pay the higher premium. 
Part A and Part B Enrollment 
People who receive Social Security or RRB retirement benefits are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A when they turn 65. Disabled persons are automatically enrolled after they have received SS or RRB disability benefits for 24 months. Both of these groups are also enrolled in Part B unless they indicate that they want to opt out. Others eligible for Medicare (such as those who are 65 or older but still working and not receiving Social Security) must sign up for Part A and Part B if they want it. 
Those who must pay for Medicare Part A can enroll during an initial enrollment period 
(three months before and after they turn 65) or later during a general enrollment period (every year from January 1 through March 31). Persons who have employer-sponsored health insurance can enroll at any time while they are still covered by the employer plan and up to eight months after this coverage ends. People who opt out of Medicare Part B when they first become eligible may enroll later during a general enrollment period, and those with employer-sponsored coverage have until eight months after that coverage ends.  
Individuals who do not enroll in Part A or Part B when they first become eligible and are not covered by employer-sponsored insurance may have to pay a late enrollment penalty, in the form of a higher premium, if they enroll later. The Part A premium is increased by 10 percent and the Part B premium by 10 percent for every 12-month period the person waits to enroll.  
Medicare Part C (Medicare Advantage) 
Medicare Advantage (Medicare Part C) is an alternative to original Medicare. Those entitled to Medicare can choose to receive coverage through original Medicare, or (in most areas of the country) they have the option of instead participating in a Medicare Advantage (MA) plan. MA plans include health maintenance organizations (HMOs), preferred provider organizations (PPOs), private fee-for-service (PFFS) plans, and others (described below). 
Medicare Advantage plans are Medicare-approved private-sector health insurance plans. The Medicare program pays an MA plan a fixed amount each month for each person it serves, and the plan provides Medicare coverage. An MA plan must provide all Part A and Part B coverage. Most MA plans provide additional benefits, such as coverage of Medicare cost-sharing payments, and some provide coverage that goes beyond original Medicare such as dental care, hearing aids, and eyeglasses. Finally, most Medicare Advantage plans offer Medicare Part D prescription drug benefits (usually at an additional cost). 
Premiums and Enrollment 
Enrollees pay their MA plan a monthly premium that covers the Medicare Part B premium and pays for any benefits in addition to Medicare Part A and B that the plan provides. MA participants also pay copayments and sometimes deductibles and coinsurance for some services. The extent of coverage beyond original Medicare, premium rates, and cost-sharing payments vary from plan to plan.  
To enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan, a person must be enrolled in or eligible for Medicare Part A and Part B and live in the area covered by the MA plan. A person can enroll in an MA plan when she first becomes eligible for Medicare (three months before and after she turns 65 or three months before and after her 24th month of disability). There are also enrollment periods each year during which a person can switch from original Medicare to an MA plan, or from an MA plan to original Medicare, or from one MA plan to another. 
Medicare Part D 
Medicare Part D provides outpatient prescription drug coverage. Persons eligible for Medicare choose whether to participate in Part D, and those who do pay an additional monthly premium. Part D benefits are provided by Medicare-approved private-sector prescription drug plans (PDPs). A Medicare beneficiary enrolls in the PDP of her choice, receives benefits from that PDP, and pays her Part D premium directly to the PDP. Most Medicare Advantage plans also offer Part D benefits (usually at an additional cost). A majority of Medicare beneficiaries have Part D coverage, 38 percent from a PDP, 19 percent from an MA plan.3 
Medicare beneficiaries usually have many PDPs to choose from, and PDPs vary in the benefit packages they offer. But all plans must provide a minimal level of benefits, and Medicare also specifies certain drugs that all PDPs must cover. The benefits and costsharing of a PDP are typically structured as follows: 
• Annual deductible. The standard amount in 2010 is $310, but this may vary, and not all PDPs have a deductible. 
• Copayments and/or coinsurance. Coinsurance percentages are often 25 or 33 percent. Copayment amounts vary widely from plan to plan. 
• Coverage gap. Once the total amount both the beneficiary and the PDP have paid for drugs reaches a certain level (the initial coverage limit), there is a coverage gap, during which the beneficiary pays all costs and the PDP pays nothing. Some PDPs cover some drugs during the coverage gap, but they charge a higher premium. 
• Catastrophic coverage. If the amount the beneficiary has paid for drugs reaches a certain level (the out-of-pocket limit), catastrophic coverage is triggered, and the coverage gap ends. From this point until the end of the year, the beneficiary pays only small copayment or coinsurance amounts.  
Let’s look at an example of how Part D works: Kate is a Medicare beneficiary enrolled in a PDP. She takes several prescription drugs. How much of her costs does the PDP pay, and how much does Kate have to pay herself? 
• Each year, Kate must pay the first $310 of costs to satisfy her plan’s deductible. Then, under the rules of her plan, she pays 25 percent coinsurance—that is, she pays 25 percent of costs and the PDP pays the rest. (Other plans charge a different percentage or flat-dollar copayment amounts.)  
• After several months, the amount Kate has paid (for the deductible and coinsurance) plus the amount the PDP has paid together total $2,830, the initial coverage limit (2010). The coverage gap begins, and Kate must pay the full cost of her prescriptions for the remainder of the year (although she benefits from discounts negotiated by her PDP). 
• Now suppose Kate’s costs (deductible, coinsurance, and costs she pays herself after the initial coverage limit) reach $4,550, the out-of-pocket limit (2010). Catastrophic coverage is triggered, and from then until the end of the year, Kate pays only small coinsurance or copayment amounts.  
Healthcare reform makes substantial changes to this system. In 2010 beneficiaries who have to pay their own costs during the coverage gap will receive a $250 rebate. From 2011 through 2020, the portion of costs beneficiaries pay during the coverage gap will be gradually reduced to 25 percent, effectively eliminating the gap. Also during those years the level at which catastrophic coverage is triggered will be lowered. And starting in 2011 drug manufacturers will be required to give those in the coverage gap a 50 percent discount on brand-name drugs, and additional federal subsidies for generic drugs will be phased in. 
People with low income and limited assets may qualify for “extra help”—Medicare may help pay their premiums, deductibles, and copayments and coinsurance, and there is no coverage gap. 
A person can enroll in Part D when he first becomes eligible for Medicare or later, during an annual enrollment period (November 15 through December 31 of each year, with coverage beginning January 1). However, for those who enroll after they first become eligible there is generally a late enrollment penalty—they pay a higher premium for as long as they are enrolled in Medicare Part D. There is an exception for those who have employer-sponsored drug coverage—they may wait to enroll, and there is no penalty as long as they enroll no later than 63 days after losing their employer coverage.  
The History of Medicare Managed Care  
Medicare beneficiaries pose unique challenges for Medicare health plans, which take on the financial risk for the provision of services under fixed payments received from the federal government. Medicare beneficiaries have a higher incidence of both acute illness and chronic illness than does the general population, and they are more likely to become disabled and require long periods of rehabilitation. At the same time, health plans have a much greater ability than fee-for-service insurance to effectively manage the delivery of multiple or complex medical services and contain costs through emphasis on preventive care services, utilization management, and coordinated care through network providers. The federal government seeks to bring these attributes to Medicare by encouraging private-sector options. Figure 25.1 demonstrates the growth in enrollment in Medicare Advantage plans over time. 
Figure 25.1 
 
The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) of 1982  
The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) of 1982 introduced managed care into Medicare. Under TEFRA, health plans entered into contracts with Medicare to provide Part A and/or Part B benefits on either a cost basis or a risk basis. Organizations with cost contracts received monthly payments from the federal government based on estimates of the reasonable cost of delivering covered services, which could be adjusted to reflect actual costs. Cost plans accepted no risk and allowed beneficiaries to use doctors and hospitals outside the plan networks. Enrollees were required to pay a large portion of their healthcare expenses through premiums and deductibles. Health plans could contract on a cost basis for both Medicare Part A and Part B coverage or for Part B services only. Health plans that offered Part A and B were referred to as reasonable cost contracts or cost contracts. Health plans that offered only Part B coverage were classified as healthcare prepayment plans (HCPPs). 
Health plans that participated in Medicare risk contracts received a specified geographically based capitation payment from CMS each month for each plan member, regardless of the amount or cost of services the member actually received. The health plans were at risk for delivering the contracted-for level of services at these fixed rates. Medicare risk contracts were attractive to beneficiaries because they typically offered preventive care and other benefits beyond the traditional Medicare Part A and Part B services for the same or only slightly higher premiums. For services to be covered, however, they needed to be obtained from the Medicare risk plan's network of providers and were subject to other utilization controls. 
The Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997  
The Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997 again restructured the Medicare program, absorbing the TEFRA Medicare risk contracts into the new Medicare+Choice program. Medicare plans that complied with CMS requirements were automatically transitioned into Medicare+Choice. Cost contracts were initially to be phased out by December 31, 2002, but subsequent legislation extended their operation first by two more years and then indefinitely under certain conditions set out by the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003. 
The BBA expanded the number of delivery options for Medicare services and also established operational requirements for plans participating in Medicare+Choice. These requirements have a direct impact on the types of administrative and healthcare services that Medicare health plans offer and the steps that health plans must take to maintain the quality of those services, and they were carried over to the next Medicare program restructuring. 
The Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003  
The Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 
(commonly called the Medicare Modernization Act, or MMA) renamed the Medicare+Choice program Medicare Advantage. The Medicare Advantage (MA) program was largely based on the Medicare+Choice program in terms of program operations, benefits, and quality of care initiatives, but it expanded the existing private health plan product options available to Medicare beneficiaries. Coordinated care plans, such as health maintenance organizations (HMOs), preferred provider organizations (PPOs), and provider-sponsored organizations (PSOs), as well as private fee-for-service plans, are the available options under Medicare Advantage. The MMA expanded the types of options to include new regional PPOs in 2005. 
Regional MA-PPOs 
Beginning in 2006, beneficiaries had the option of enrolling in Medicare Advantage regional PPOs (regional MA-PPOs) that offer network and out-of-network benefits as well as caps on beneficiary out-of-pocket costs. Unlike local MA plans, which serve individual counties and/or groups of counties, the new regional MA-PPOs bid to serve an entire region, which may be a state or multi-state area.  
Unlike original Medicare, with its separate deductibles for Parts A and B, regional MAPPOs are required to have a single, unified deductible (if they have one at all). They may waive this deductible for preventive care and other services. Regional PPOs must also have catastrophic limits on out-of-pocket expenditures for in-network services and for all covered services. Benefit packages and premiums must be uniform across the entire region.  

Local MA Plans 
In addition to regional MA-PPOs, there are the following categories of local MA plans: 
• Coordinated care plans (CCPs) include health maintenance organizations (HMOs), point-of-service (POS) plans, preferred provider organizations (PPOs), and provider-sponsored organizations (PSOs).  
• Private fee-for-service (PFFS) plans. PFFS plans do not have a network. Members can go to any Medicare-approved provider that accepts payment from the PFFS plan. However, not all providers accept such payment, so plan members may have limited choices. Some PFFS plans offer prescription drug coverage, but some do not. (If not, members can enroll in a Medicare Part D PDP if they wish.) The requirements for PFFS plans are changing effective 2011, causing them to shift to a provider network or cease operation. 
• Medicare medical savings account (MMSA) plans. MMSA plans work like health savings accounts (HSAs), discussed in an earlier module. Participants are covered by a qualified high-deductible health plan (HDHP) and can withdraw money from a tax-advantaged account into which the plan makes an annual deposit. Participants must pay for their care out of their own pockets until they have satisfied the deductible, after which the plan pays. They can use money from their account to pay out-of-pocket costs, but the amount deposited each year is usually less than the deductible, so they generally have to pay at least some costs out of their own funds. MMSA plans do not include drug coverage, but participants can enroll in a PDP.  
• Special needs plans (SNPs). SNPs serve special populations, such as Medicare/Medicaid dual eligibles, those with certain chronic and debilitating diseases (such as diabetes or HIV/AIDS), or nursing home residents. They operate like an HMO—they have a network, and care must normally be obtained from network providers. Members must have a primary care physician or a care coordinator and must have a referral to see a specialist. All SNPs provide drug coverage. 
Healthcare Reform 
Healthcare reform includes provisions designed to reduce government expenditures on Medicare Advantage and make MA plans operate more efficiently.  
• Government payments to MA plans will be reduced beginning in 2012. This could result in higher premiums or reduced benefits for plan members. MA plans will not be allowed to compensate for this reduction by charging higher cost-sharing than original Medicare.  
• On the other hand, MA plans that meet certain quality standards will receive bonuses (to be phased in from 2011 through 2013). A plan must use this money first to reduce costs, then to add prevention and wellness coverage, and if any money remains, to add coverage of such items as vision and dental care. 
• Beginning in 2014 MA plans will be required to maintain a medical loss ratio of at least 85 percent.  
Medicare Supplement Insurance  
As we have seen, although original Medicare provides extensive coverage, it does not pay all healthcare expenses. It has substantial deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance, and it does not cover dental care and dentures, vision care and eyeglasses, hearing aids, and a number of other health-related services and products.  
To fill some of these gaps, those enrolled in original Medicare may purchase Medicare supplement insurance (commonly called Medigap policies). Because Medicare Advantage plans offer more comprehensive coverage, MA enrollees do not need (and are not permitted to purchase) Medigap policies. 
A Medigap policy is a state-approved, private-sector individual insurance policy that provides reimbursement for expenses not covered by original Medicare. Medigap policies primarily cover cost-sharing payments Medicare beneficiaries must make. Some policies also provide benefits for a few healthcare expenses not covered by Medicare, such as emergency care received outside the U.S. Medigap policies do not cover dental, vision, or hearing care. 
Standard Medigap Plans 
Medigap policies are subject to extensive government regulation. A limited number of standard Medigap plans, each with a certain combination of benefits, have been established, and insurers are required to offer only these plans. In addition, all insurers must use the same standardized format, language, and definitions in describing the benefits of the plans. This standardization is intended to make it easier for consumers to compare plans and premiums. Since insurers offer the same standard plans, they compete on the basis of price and customer service. (This system applies in all states except Massachusetts, Minnesota, and Wisconsin, which have their own regulations.) Changes have been made to this system over the years, and new rules went into effect June 1, 2010.  
Figure 25.2 shows the standard Medigap plans as of June 1, 2010, and Figure 25.3 shows the earlier system. Only plans in Figure 25.2 can be sold now, but plans sold earlier may continue in force.4 
All Medigap plans must provide at least a basic benefit package. This includes Part A daily hospital copayments, up to 365 days of hospital coverage per lifetime after Medicare hospital benefits are exhausted, hospice copayments and coinsurance, Part B coinsurance, and the first three pints of blood each year. Since the establishment of Medicare Part D in 2006, new Medigap policies may not include prescription drug benefits, but some policies sold before then do.  
Healthcare reform will make further changes to the standardized Medigap plans. It mandates the creation of new plans C and F, with nominal cost-sharing designed to encourage the use of appropriate physician services under Medicare Part B. These new plans C and F will become available in 2015. 
 
 
 
Medicare SELECT 
A Medicare SELECT policy is a type of Medigap policy. Like other Medigap policies, a SELECT policy must provide the benefit package of one of the standard Medigap plans. The difference is that it operates like a preferred provider organization (PPO)—it has a network of healthcare providers, and beneficiaries are given financial incentives to use hospitals and in some cases physicians affiliated with the network. If they use nonnetwork providers, they may incur cost-sharing payments. On the other hand, because the use of a provider network tends to hold down costs, a SELECT plan can usually charge a lower premium.  
Eligibility and Enrollment 
To be eligible for Medigap insurance, an individual must be enrolled in original Medicare, both Part A and Part B. As noted, those participating in a Medicare Advantage plan do not need and may not buy a Medigap policy.  
If a person applies for a Medigap policy during her Medigap open enrollment period, guaranteed issue applies—that is, the insurer cannot subject her to medical underwriting, deny her coverage, make her wait for coverage, or charge her more than the standard premium. A person’s open enrollment period begins the first day of the first month in which she is both 65 or older and enrolled in Medicare Part B, and it lasts for six months. In addition, in certain circumstances an individual is entitled to guaranteed issue after her open enrollment period, such as when a person does not enroll in Medigap coverage because she has an employer-sponsored health plan but applies later when that coverage terminates, or when a person’s Medigap coverage ends through no fault of her own and she wants to buy a new policy. If a person is not entitled to guaranteed issue, the insurer has the right to conduct underwriting, decline to offer her coverage, or charge her a higher-than-standard premium. 
Conclusion 
The federal Medicare program provides healthcare coverage to the elderly, some disabled persons, and a few others. But Medicare does not pay all health-related expenses, and many beneficiaries buy an individual Medicare supplement (Medigap) insurance policy to fill some of the gaps (mostly Medicare deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance). The Medicare Advantage (MA) program offers an alternative—individuals eligible for Medicare can enroll in a private-sector MA plan and receive Medicare coverage; benefits comparable to Medigap; usually additional coverage (such as dental care, hearing aids, and eyeglasses); and in most cases Medicare Part D prescription drug benefits. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, “Medicare Advantage 2010 Data Spotlight, Plan Enrollment Patterns and Trends,” June 2010. 2  Most people have their Part B premium deducted from their Social Security check. In 2010 Social Security benefits were not increased since the cost of living did not rise. This means that if a higher Part B premium were deducted from a person’s Social Security check, she would receive less than the previous year, and this is not allowed under Social Security rules. Therefore, anyone who has been having the standard Part B premium deducted from her Social Security continues to pay the 2009 amount ($96.40). Only people who begin Medicare in 2010 or who do not have their premium deducted from Social Security pay the official 2010 amount ($110.30).  
3 The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, “Analysis of the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, Access to Care File, 2007.” 
4
  Both tables are from “Choosing a Medigap Policy 2010,” published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and available at www.Medicare.gov.  

27 Government Programs: Medicaid, CHIP, FEHB, TRICARE, and Workers’ Compensation 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• describe the main federal health coverage programs for low-income people 
   (Medicaid and CHIP),  explain the role of health plans in Medicaid and CHIP, 
• describe the Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program and the TRICARE program for the uniformed services and explain the role of health plans in them, and 
• describe state-mandated workers’ compensation coverage and the role of health plans in it.  
In the preceding module we discussed a federal program, Medicare, that provides health benefits to the elderly and some disabled persons. In this module we will look at the other major government health benefit programs.  
• Medicaid is a federal-state program that pays for healthcare for low-income people who meet certain criteria. Currently most recipients are children, pregnant women, and elderly and disabled persons, but under healthcare reform all people with income below a certain level will qualify. 
• The Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) is also a federal-state program. It provides health coverage for children whose families are not poor enough to qualify for Medicaid but too poor to buy private-sector health insurance. 
• Under the Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program, the federal government, as an employer, sponsors health coverage for its employees and their dependents. 
• TRICARE is the health plan of the Department of Defense for members of the uniformed services, retirees, and their dependents. 
• Under workers’ compensation laws, states require employers to purchase or provide coverage that pays employees benefits for healthcare costs and lost earnings if they suffer a work-related injury or illness. 
Medicaid 
Medicaid is a government program that pays for healthcare received by some poor people. Medicaid is a major component of the nation’s healthcare financing system—in 
2008 it served more than 58 million people and spent almost $320 billion.1 And healthcare reform will substantially increase these numbers, adding an expected 16 million new recipients.  
Medicaid is a federal-state program. The federal government establishes broad guidelines for its operation, but each state administers its own program and determines, within these guidelines, eligibility criteria; the type, amount, and duration of services its program pays for; and rates of payment for services. Thus, a person who is eligible for Medicaid in one state may not be eligible in another state, and the benefits provided in one state may not be provided in another. Also, state Medicaid programs may change from year to year in response to changing needs or emerging problems. 
The federal government pays a percentage of each state’s Medicaid expenditures, and the state covers the rest. The federal percentage is higher for poor states and lower for rich states, but it is at least 50 percent. 
Eligibility 
Medicaid is for the poor, but not all poor people are eligible. Some people are considered categorically needy, that is, they qualify for Medicaid because they fall into certain categories. The federal government has established a number of mandatory categories—all state Medicaid programs must provide benefits to people in these categories in order to receive federal funding. The most important mandatory categories include: 
 children ages six through 18 whose family’s income is at or below the federal poverty level (FPL) and children under six whose family’s income is at or below 133 percent of the FPL;  	pregnant women with family income at or below 133 percent of the FPL;   	elderly and disabled persons with very little or no income who qualify for Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payments; and   a few parents and other family members (such as grandparents) who take care of children younger than 18, have extremely low income, and meet certain restrictive conditions. 
There are also optional categories—states may provide Medicaid coverage to members of these categories but are not required to do so. The optional categories generally cover the same populations (children, pregnant women, the elderly, and the disabled) as the mandatory categories, but income standards and other criteria are slightly less restrictive. For example, a state may cover children six through 18 with family income up to 133 of the FPL or elderly and disabled persons who do not qualify for SSI but have incomes below the FPL.  
Some states also extend Medicaid eligibility to the medically needy—those who do not qualify as members of one of the above categories but who have depleted their income and assets to pay for healthcare or long-term care. These states allow non-poor individuals to spend down—that is, they can qualify for Medicaid benefits by spending their money on care until their income and assets are reduced to very low levels established by the state. Many middle-income people faced with the enormous costs of an indefinite period of nursing home care or home healthcare spend down until they have almost nothing left, at which point Medicaid begins covering costs. 
As mentioned, under PPACA eligibility for Medicaid will be substantially expanded. As of January 2014, states will be required to cover all persons with income at or below 133 percent of the FPL. The greatest change: Low-income adults, who currently qualify only if they fall into a certain category (pregnant, elderly, or disabled persons and a few parents), will be eligible. This means that millions of non-disabled adults under age 65, who have not been eligible in the past even though they have very low incomes, will be enrolled in Medicaid. Also, children six and older, who currently must have income at or below the FPL (although some states have somewhat higher limits), will qualify with income up to 133 percent of the FPL. The federal government will pay nearly all of the cost of providing Medicaid to these additional people: 100 percent until 2016, decreasing gradually to 90 percent in 2020. 
Coverage 
The healthcare and long-term care services covered by Medicaid vary somewhat from state to state, but in all states they are extensive. The federal government requires all state programs to provide benefits for these services: 
 	inpatient and outpatient hospital services,  	physician services,  	laboratory and X-ray services,  	medical and surgical dental services,  	nursing facility services for individuals age 21 or older,  	home healthcare for persons who are nursing home eligible (those who, according to criteria established by Medicaid, would need nursing home care if they did not receive home care), and  various other services. 
Many states also provide benefits for dental services, optometrist services and eyeglasses, prosthetic devices, and prescription drugs. Medicaid recipients may be charged small deductibles and copayments for some services. Only a few states charge premiums, and the amounts are very small. 
In the area of long-term care, as noted above, all states are required to pay for nursing home care and home healthcare for the nursing home eligible. And although federal guidelines do not require it, some states also pay benefits for home and communitybased long-term care services for certain other Medicaid recipients. Finally, some states pay for long-term care services received in an assisted living residence.  
Medicare and Medicaid Overlap 
Some elderly people with very limited assets and incomes are dual eligibles—they receive benefits from both Medicare and Medicaid. If a service is covered by both programs, Medicare pays. Medicaid pays for services not covered by Medicare but covered by Medicaid (such as nursing facility care beyond Medicare’s 100-day limit, eyeglasses, and hearing aids). Medicaid also pays for Medicare premiums and deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments for certain very poor Medicare beneficiaries.  
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) 
The Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) is a federal-state program that pays for healthcare for children from families not poor enough to qualify for Medicaid but too poor to afford private-sector health coverage. As with Medicaid, the federal government sets broad guidelines, and within those guidelines each state administers its own program, establishes eligibility rules, and provides coverage. Also like Medicaid, CHIP is jointly funded by the federal government and the states, but the federal government pays a higher percentage of costs than for Medicaid. 
While nowhere near as large as Medicare or Medicaid, CHIP provides coverage to large numbers of children who otherwise would have been uninsured. In 2008 CHIP covered 7.4 million people.2 Under PPACA, CHIP will not be substantially changed, but some CHIP children will be shifted to Medicaid, and federal funding for CHIP will increase. 
Eligibility 
Eligible for CHIP are children who: 
 are 18 or younger,   are not covered by health insurance,   are ineligible for Medicaid, and   have family income below a certain level. 
States set their own income eligibility limits for CHIP. However, full federal funding is provided only for children with family income at or below 300 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). A state may provide coverage to children with higher family income, but federal funding is lower. Most states have income limits from 200 to 300 percent of the FPL, but a few have limits above or below this range. 
States have the option of offering CHIP coverage to pregnant women without health insurance, and about a quarter of the states do. A few states also cover parents of lowincome children, but this is being phased out. Some states offer families eligible for CHIP the alternative of financial assistance to pay for private health insurance.  
Coverage 
A state’s CHIP can be part of its Medicaid program, a separate program, or both. Under a Medicaid expansion, a state must provide CHIP eligibles the same coverage it provides other Medicaid recipients. In creating a coverage package under a separate CHIP, a state may choose from these three options: 
• Benchmark coverage. The state provides the same coverage as the standard Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offered to federal employees, the health plan offered to state employees, or the health maintenance organization (HMO) with the largest number of non-Medicaid enrollees in the state. 
• Benchmark-equivalent coverage. The state provides basic coverage (physician and surgical services, inpatient and outpatient hospital care, well baby/well child care including immunizations, and laboratory and x-ray services). The state also provides coverage for additional services (prescription drugs, vision and hearing care) that is at least 75 percent of the actuarial equivalent of the benchmark plan.  
• Secretary-approved coverage. The state proposes an alternative plan and receives approval from the Secretary of HHS.  
Under both Medicaid expansions and separate CHIPs, premiums and copayments may be charged. But there are limits for families with incomes at or below 150 percent of the FPL, and for all families the total amount of premiums and cost-sharing cannot exceed 5 percent of family income. 
Medicaid, CHIP, and Health Plans 
The Growth of Medicaid Managed Care 
In the early years of Medicaid, most states made healthcare available to recipients exclusively through fee-for-service arrangements with participating medical providers. But as the program and the number of recipients grew, states began using managed care to control and predict costs and provide access to healthcare in areas where Medicaid providers were limited. States also hoped to reduce reliance on emergency rooms as a source of primary care. 
However, the shift to managed care was initially slowed by federal rules that allowed enrollment in health plans only on a voluntary basis (with the agreement of the recipient). A state could require individuals to participate in managed care, but only by obtaining a waiver (an exemption from federal guidelines) from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Two waivers were used for this purpose: The 1915(b) waiver allowed states to require enrollment in managed care and to mandate managed care in only parts of the state (waiving the rule that the same coverage must be provided statewide). The 1115 waiver provided for even more flexibility in state Medicaid programs’ benefit packages and service delivery models and allowed states to require managed care statewide. 
These waivers enabled states to increase the use of managed care, and large numbers of Medicaid recipients were enrolled in health plans. But the process of obtaining a waiver is burdensome and lengthy, often taking a year or more, and renewal is required every five years. The Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997 addressed this problem by allowing states, without a waiver, to mandate managed care for all Medicaid enrollees except Medicare-Medicaid dual eligibles (elderly and disabled persons), American Indians, and certain children with special needs. Under the BBA, a state need only obtain approval of a state plan amendment (SPA), which can take as little as 30 days.  
The BBA resulted in substantial growth in Medicaid managed care. When the Act was passed in 1997, slightly less than half of Medicaid enrollees were in managed care, but by 2009 over 70 percent were. By that year, in nearly all states a majority of the Medicaid population was in managed care, and in 21 states more than 80 percent was. 
Only two states (Alaska and Wyoming) had no Medicaid managed care.3 
Medicaid Health Plans 
Under Medicaid managed care, recipients choose or are assigned to a “medical home” (a health plan) and a primary care provider (PCP). State Medicaid programs must contract with at least two managed care entities or with a single entity that offers at least two health plans, so that recipients have at least two options to choose from. There are two broad categories of service delivery: primary care case management (PCCM) and risk-based care. 
• Primary care case management (PCCM). In this approach, PCPs provide basic healthcare and serve as case managers in making referrals for specialty care. PCPs are compensated for primary care on a fee-for-service basis and for case management by means of a small monthly capitation payment. Specialty care may be delivered by a fee-for-service provider or in some cases by another managed care provider such as a prepaid health plan (see below). PCCM programs have become particularly prevalent in rural areas where there are few health plans. 
• Risk-based care. Health plans in this category provide care to enrollees for a monthly capitated fee. A plan may provide either comprehensive or limited healthcare services. Risk-based care plans include the following types: 
o A health insuring organization (HIO) is county-based and covers healthcare through payments to or arrangements with providers. HIOs are exempt from the rule requiring recipients to have a choice of at least two health plans. 
o A prepaid inpatient health plan (PIHP) does not have a comprehensive risk contract with Medicaid. It provides or arranges for the provision of inpatient hospital care or institutional services. 
o A prepaid ambulatory health plan (PAHP), like a PIHP, does not have a comprehensive risk contract. A PAHP provides or arranges for the provision of services other than inpatient hospital care or institutional services (such as dental care or mental healthcare). 
o A managed care organization (MCO) is either a federally qualified heath maintenance organization (HMO) or another public or private entity that provides comprehensive healthcare services comparable to those available to other Medicaid enrollees in the area. 
The BBA, in addition to allowing mandatory enrollment in managed care, eliminated the so-called 75/25 rule. This rule was designed to maintain quality by preventing an MCO from serving only Medicaid recipients—specifically, an MCO participating in Medicaid had to have at least 25 percent of its members enrolled through the private sector. The abolition of this rule resulted in the birth of so-called Medicaid MCOs, which are established specifically to serve Medicaid recipients and now play a major role in the managed care arena. 
Many Medicaid MCOs are operated by safety-net hospitals or clinics that have traditionally served low-income populations, but others are run by private corporations that have chosen to specialize in the Medicaid market. A few states now rely solely on Medicaid MCOs, but most use Medicaid MCOs, other MCOs, and other health plans. The choices offered by states vary widely and are often tied to geographic, political, and market considerations. And a recipient may be enrolled in more than one health plan, with different services provided by each. 
Quality Standards 
Another change made by the BBA was the establishment of quality standards and recipient protections for Medicaid health plans. These require plans to: 
• demonstrate adequate capacity and services,  meet certain quality assurance standards,  assure coverage of emergency services,  have a grievance process in place, and 
• ensure that mechanisms are in place to assess the quality and appropriateness of care to enrollees with special healthcare needs. 
States may use their own review process to ensure compliance with these standards, or they may use information obtained from a Medicare or private accreditation review. 
Challenges in Serving the Medicaid Population 
Medicaid recipients often have special needs, and health plans participating in Medicaid are required by law to take certain steps to address these needs. 
• Medicaid recipients have low incomes, and many low-income people have limited access to transportation. Plans must take into account the means of transportation ordinarily used by potential enrollees when developing their networks and considering the location of providers. 
• The Medicaid population is more culturally diverse than the general populace. A plan must make available enrollment materials in non-English languages prevalent in its service area, and it must make oral interpretation services available free-of-charge. Enrollees must be given information about plan providers who speak non-English languages. 
• Medicaid recipients often have more complex health and social needs than is typical of the commercial market.  
Another challenge to health plans participating in Medicaid relates to the periodic redetermination of a person’s Medicaid eligibility. A recipient must be reevaluated at least annually, and in some states this is done more frequently. Individuals must complete a form and submit documentation of certain eligibility factors, and many people lose their eligibility not because they no longer meet the criteria but because they fail to comply with administrative requirements. Some people let their eligibility lapse if they do not currently need medical care and reapply when they do. The result is “churning”— people moving in and out of Medicaid and in and out of their health plan, resulting in interruptions in the continuity of care and added administrative work.  
The Elderly and Disabled 
The elderly and disabled are only a small percentage of the Medicaid managed care population. This reflects the fact that they represent only about a quarter of the overall Medicaid population (most recipients are children).4  But another reason is the problems states have encountered establishing contracts with health plans to cover these categories, as plans entering into such contracts must manage the complex medical conditions inherent to older and disabled persons and meet their needs for specialty medical care and in some cases long-term care (nursing home care and home healthcare). As a result, some state Medicaid programs still have no managed care for the elderly and disabled, and the rest vary significantly in the plans available to these people.  
But while the elderly and disabled are only a minority of Medicaid recipients, because of their greater needs they account for over two-thirds of expenditures.5 So states seek to rein in spending for these categories and better manage their care, and in doing so they continue to experiment with new health plan concepts.  
The most successful model to date has been PACE (Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly). First established in San Francisco in the early 1970s, PACE is now offered in 27 states. It provides community-based long-term care at a capitated rate to frail persons age 55 and older who would otherwise need nursing home care. While some services are available in an individual’s home, most are provided at an adult day center. 
However, although PACE is a widely praised model, total enrollment is extremely small 
(less than 16,000 nationwide, half of this in only five states.)6 
Managed Care in CHIP 
As in Medicaid, in the Children’s Health Insurance Program managed care has become increasingly important, and most participants are enrolled in health plans. As with Medicaid, states may offer a PCCM plan, a risk-based care plan, or a combination. States have the option of offering CHIP enrollees a more restrictive benefit package than that provided to Medicaid recipients, provided it meets the standards described above. 
A significant difference between Medicaid and CHIP has to do with when coverage begins. A Medicaid recipient is covered as of the date of her application for Medicaid (or sometimes even a few months before), and her care is covered on a fee-for-service basis until her enrollment in a health plan is completed. In CHIP, on the other hand, coverage does not begin until the applicant has enrolled in a health plan, which may take a month or two after her CHIP application is approved. 
Premium Assistance in Medicaid and CHIP 
Instead of providing Medicaid and CHIP recipients with health coverage (either fee-forservice or managed care), a state has another option—premium assistance. Persons who qualify for Medicaid or CHIP but who also have access to employer-sponsored health insurance enroll in the employer plan, and the state pays the premium. (Often the premium for family members not eligible for Medicaid or CHIP is also paid.) The state pays cost-sharing (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) for Medicaid-eligibles; CHIP-eligibles may have to pay some cost-sharing themselves, depending on their income. Finally, the state provides wrap coverage to pay expenses covered by Medicaid or CHIP but not by the private insurance.  
Premium assistance enables a state to ensure that a person has health coverage while spending considerably less than it would to provide coverage directly. Medicaid recipients may generally choose between premium assistance and Medicaid coverage; in some states premium assistance is mandatory for CHIP-eligibles. Premium assistance is commonly used and is often mandatory for Medicaid waiver populations (people who are not eligible for Medicaid under normal rules but to whom a state extends eligibility under a waiver, most commonly childless adults). 
Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program 
The Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program provides health coverage for full-time employees of the United States government, qualified retirees, and their spouses, dependents, and survivors. Under FEHB a large number of insurance companies and employee associations (including labor unions) offer health plans, and employees choose one. FEHB is operated by the federal Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and it is the largest employer-based group health insurance program in the world, providing coverage to more than 8 million people.7 
Federal employees can select from a large number of health plans offering a variety of coverage types, benefit packages, and premiums amounts. In recent years more than 250 plans have participated in FEHB, although the number available to each employee varies depending on where she lives. (While some plans operate nationally, others are regional.) Plans include traditional fee-for-service insurance policies, PPOs, HMOs, HMOs with a point-of-service (POS) feature, and high-deductible health plans.  
While benefit packages vary significantly, all FEHB plans must provide a minimal level of coverage that includes hospital care, surgical care, in-patient and out-patient care, obstetrical care, mental health and substance abuse care, and prescription drugs. All plans must also meet FEHB standards related to access to care, benefit design, and patient safety. Premiums vary according to plan type and benefit package. The federal government pays a portion (usually 72 or 75 percent), and the employee pays the rest. 
When a person is hired by the federal government, he chooses a plan from those available in his locality. A plan may not refuse to enroll him based on preexisting conditions, other health factors, age, or similar factors, and it may not impose a waiting period before coverage begins. Each year there is an open enrollment period during which federal workers can change plans if they wish.  
TRICARE 
TRICARE is the U.S. Department of Defense healthcare plan, serving members of the military and other uniformed services of the U.S. government, retirees, and their spouses and dependents. TRICARE uses a worldwide system of military hospitals and clinics as its main healthcare delivery system, but this is augmented by a network of civilian providers and facilities. TRICARE provides coverage to nearly 10 million people.8 

Congress funds TRICARE through the annual Department of Defense appropriation, and it can make changes to TRICARE benefits. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD/HA) and the TRICARE Management Authority (TMA) translate the annual appropriation and changes into policy. Contracted third-party administrators (three regional U.S. contractors and one international contractor) execute the policies to serve beneficiaries. The contractors also develop and maintain the network of civilian providers and facilities. 
Eligibility 
To qualify for TRICARE, a person must be associated with one of the seven uniformed services of the U.S. government: the four branches of the military (the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps) plus the Coast Guard, the Commissioned Corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service. Those eligible include the following: 
• active duty members of the services and activated members of the National Guard and the Reserves; 
• retirees of the services (honorably discharged after 20 or more years of service); and  the spouses and dependent children of the above. 
Service members honorably discharged after less than 20 years are not eligible for TRICARE, but they can receive care through the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs (CHAMPVA). 
Coverage 
TRICARE covers a broad range of healthcare services from both military and civilian providers. Participants choose from numerous plans based on their needs; the major options are summarized below: 
• TRICARE Standard and Extra—traditional fee-for-service health insurance with annual deductibles and two levels of cost-sharing. A member can receive care from an authorized non-network provider (the Standard option), but she pays higher cost-sharing than if she uses a TRICARE network provider (the Extra option).  
• TRICARE Prime—a traditional gatekeeper HMO with a point-of-service (POS) option. The beneficiary’s primary care provider (called a “primary care manager”) must work in a military facility or be a network provider. TRICARE Prime is required for active duty service members and activated reservists; it is an option for beneficiaries living in a “Prime Service Area” who are not eligible for Medicare. 
• US Family Health Plan—a version of TRICARE Prime. Beneficiaries do not receive care from military facilities, TRICARE network providers, or Medicare providers, but rather one of the six former Public Health Service healthcare providers. 
• TRICARE Reserve Select—a premium-based health plan for certain members of the Reserves and their families who are not eligible for FEHB. 
• TRICARE for Life—Medicare wrap-around coverage for individuals enrolled in Medicare Parts A and B. 
• TRICARE Dental Program—a voluntary traditional, premium-based dental insurance plan. It is free-of-charge for active duty service members and activated reservists.  
• TRICARE Pharmacy Program—tiered formulary prescription drug coverage provided through military facilities, network and non-network retail pharmacies, and mail-order pharmacies. 
TRICARE is always the payor of last resort. When a dependent or military retiree has health insurance from an employer or some other coverage, TRICARE pays benefits on the remaining balance only after the other insurance has paid. 
Premiums 
Active duty service members and activated reservists do not pay a premium for TRICARE, although they may be charged copayments for some benefits (such as prescription drugs). Most other TRICARE beneficiaries pay premiums. Premiums vary based on a person’s status (retiree or dependent) and the benefit package she chooses, and they range from nominal amounts to rates typical of the private-sector market. Retirees generally pay very low premiums; rate increases for them have been discussed many times over the past several years, but most in Congress are reluctant to take action that might be viewed as burdening veterans.  
Health Plan Features 
TRICARE has adopted health plan features such as referrals, authorization systems, and case management. In some locations military treatment facility (MTF) staff conduct medical management activities, while in others private-sector health plans are contracted to perform them. TRICARE medical management programs include preventive care, utilization management, disease management, case management, and care coordination. TRICARE has undertaken a variety of quality initiatives using performance measures, and it seeks appropriate accreditation for facilities. All health plan contractors are required to follow TRICARE quality management and utilization management procedures.  
The Effect of War 
Armed conflict has important affects on TRICARE: 
• Active duty physicians, nurses, and other medical providers are routinely deployed overseas. Since their military facility positions are then vacant, network providers are more heavily relied on to maintain the same access to care. 
• When reservists are called to active service, they and their families are added as TRICARE beneficiaries before, during, and for a period after deployment. 
• Significant care, both physical and emotional, is needed for those injured in war. The full impact of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is only now starting to be recognized.  
• The effect on families should not be ignored either—being separated from a family member in harm’s way for a prolonged period takes a severe mental and physical toll on spouses and children, increasing their need for medical services. 
Workers' Compensation 
Workers’ compensation is a state-mandated insurance program that provides benefits to cover healthcare costs and lost earnings for employees who suffer a work-related injury or illness. 
Every state has a workers' compensation law, and all states except Texas require employers to provide workers' compensation benefits. Most employers meet this requirement by purchasing workers’ compensation insurance from an insurer. But some larger employers obtain permission from the state to self-insure or purchase highdeductable policies under which the employer retains much of the risk. Self-insured employers often hire a third-party administrator to manage their program. 
Workers' compensation provides the same types of medical benefits as regular group health insurance, but there are some significant differences: 
• Workers’ compensation benefits are paid only if an injury or illness is workrelated. 
• Workers' compensation laws prohibit deductibles and copayments, and they do not specify an annual or lifetime dollar maximum on medical benefits. 
• While group health plans typically limit coverage to employees who meet eligibility requirements (for instance, excluding part-time workers), workers’ compensation laws in nearly every state mandate coverage for all employees. 
• In many states employers are prohibited from limiting provider choice.  
While in general group health plans provide benefits whether an injury or illness is workrelated or non-work-related, an injury or illness that is covered by workers’ compensation is typically excluded from health plan coverage. But health plans differ greatly in the extent to which they enforce this provision. Many plans make little or no effort to determine if a medical bill should have been covered by workers’ compensation, while a few are quite aggressive. If there is evidence the condition is occupational, plans often pay a submitted bill but then seek reimbursement from a workers’ compensation insurer. 
In addition to medical benefits, workers' compensation also provides disability income benefits, which replace most (typically two-thirds) of the earnings an employee loses while she is unable to work because of a work-related injury or illness. These DI benefits, known as workers' compensation indemnity benefits, account for about half of all workers' compensation expenses, with medical benefits making up the other half. All states provide for temporary DI benefits during a recovery period, and in all there is some form of benefits for permanent disabilities, although the nature of these permanent benefits varies greatly by state.  
Workers’ compensation is a “no fault” system. It is not required that an employer be at fault for an employee to be eligible for benefits—if an employee suffers from an illness or injury arising out of her employment, she is eligible. However, under state laws, workers’ compensation is an employee’s exclusive remedy—if an employer is at fault, the employee receives workers’ compensation, but she cannot obtain damages in a civil lawsuit against the employer. 
Managed Workers' Compensation  
Although total workers’ compensation costs have been trending downward for the last 10 to 15 years, workers’ compensation medical benefits have been increasing. In response to this, employers and insurers have applied managed care principles to workers’ compensation, including case management, selective networks, and utilization review. Some of these projects have reduced costs substantially.  
In general, the same approaches that help control health insurance costs also work in workers’ compensation. A potential problem arises in states that (as mentioned above) prohibit employers from limiting an employee’s choice of providers. But in these states many employers find that if they suggest a provider, employees will usually give her a try and continue with her if they are satisfied with the care and service they receive. 
To help employers and health plans comply with state laws designed to ensure quality care, accreditation standards have been developed for workers’ compensation PPOs and workers’ compensation utilization review organizations (UROs) by the American Accreditation HealthCare Commission/URAC. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  Kaiser State Health Facts at http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparecat.jsp?cat=4. 2  Congressional Research Service. March 18, 2009. “State Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP): A Brief Overview”. http://opencrs.com/document/R40444/ 3  Kaiser State Health Facts, Medicaid Managed Care Enrollees as a Percent of State Medicaid Enrollees, as of June 2009 http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparemaptable.jsp?ind=217&cat=4. 4  Kaiser State Health Facts, Distribution of Medicaid Payments by Enrollment Group, FY 2007 http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparemaptable.jsp?ind=858&cat=4  5  Ibid. 6  Ibid. 7
  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Federal Employees Health Benefits Program Handbook, page 2. http://www.opm.gov/insure/health/reference/handbook/febh01.asp 
8 As of March 2010, over 9.6 million. TRICARE. TRICARE Facts and Figures. 
http://www.tricare.mil/mediacenter/press_facts.aspx  

28 Ethics in Health Plans 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 name the five main ethical principles for health plans,   list at least four ways a health plan can promote an ethical corporate culture, and  describe the contribution an ethical task force can make to a health plan.. 
Ethics are the principles and values that guide the actions of an individual or a population when faced with questions of right and wrong. Ethics are not the same as laws (although both reflect the values of a community)—laws are enforceable in our court system, but ethics are not. Ethics are a concern of both individuals and organizations. 
We expect businesses not only to adhere to applicable laws but also to be ethical—to 
?do the right thing? as they conduct their activities. And the expectation of ethical behavior is especially high for organizations and individuals involved in healthcare or healthcare benefits—patients generally believe that those in the healthcare system will act in their (the patients’) best interest. Ethical questions arise under any healthcare system, but the nature of health plans creates particular issues. Health plans have multiple goals—accessibility, cost-effectiveness, and quality of care—and this creates the potential for a variety of ethical dilemmas, both for the health plan and for healthcare providers. 
Ethical Principles for Health Plans 
The five principles listed below are widely accepted as important foundations of ethics in healthcare and are applied to the activities of health plans. None of the principles is absolute; each is qualified by the others. Additionally, principles must always be considered and weighted in the context of the particular decision.  
• Autonomy. Health plans and their providers must respect the right of plan members to make decisions about the course of their lives.  
• Non-maleficence (not doing harm). Health plans and their providers must not do harm to their members. 
• Beneficence (doing good). Health plans and their providers must promote the good of both individual plan members and the members as a group.  
• Justice and equity. Health plans and their providers should allocate resources in a way that fairly distributes benefits and burdens among members.  
• Truth-telling and promise-keeping . Health plans and their providers must present information honestly and honor commitments. 
These principles are important criteria in ethical decision-making and are the underpinning of statements of rights, duties, and obligations. But there are other ethical concepts that merit consideration, the most important of which is virtue. Virtues are traits of character generated by community and tradition which dispose individuals to act honorably. Thus, virtues are those values that, when endorsed by an individual, create 
(in the words of Aristotle) ?a habitual disposition to act well.? A health plan can behave virtuously not only toward its members, but also toward the community at large—it can adopt corporate policies that encourage healthcare professionals to provide uncompensated care, it can respond to community needs in time of crisis (such as a natural disaster), and it can offer community outreach programs.  
A considered balance of ethical principles and virtues can promote better ethical decision-making than grounding decisions on either alone. In the same way that it is the foundation of all positive human relationships, virtuous behavior is inherent in the caring aspect of healthcare. An emphasis on caring is both unique and ethically imperative in the delivery of healthcare. 
As mentioned above, the multiple objectives of health plans may create ethical issues. Health plan strive to keep treatment costs down, for the benefit of each patient and also of the plan membership as a whole. Hoped for results are not only that the individual will receive appropriate, quality care but also that the entire membership will have affordable premiums and can be offered additional benefits. In other words, health plans are not exclusively focused on the treatment needs of individual patients but also are attentive to the needs of the group. In this way, ethical issues for health plans can be different than for healthcare providers, who tend to look at each individual patient in isolation.1 
An Ethical Corporate Culture 
Health plans can promote and support an ethical organizational environment in a number of ways: 
• encouraging honest, effective, and open communication between the plan, potential members, providers, members, and members’ families; 
• adopting and honoring statements of rights and responsibilities for members, providers, and the plan;  educating members about how the system works; 
• educating employees, providers, and members about ethical issues and the mechanisms that the plan has available for understanding and responding to those issues; 
• having policies and procedures in place to provide guidance to providers and members confronted with ethical issues, and involving providers and members in developing and implementing these policies and procedures; 
• developing and maintaining a culture where ethical considerations are integrated into decision-making at all levels; 
• ensuring that organizations with which the plan contracts have policies, procedures, and practices which are compatible with those of the plan; and 
• developing formalized methods for managing ethical conflicts. Some plans may choose to establish an ethics task force, while others may use bioethics consultants or network with other organizations that have expertise in this area.2 
The Ethics Task Force 
Some health plans have established a special committee or task force to consider ethical issues confronting the organization. The role and functions of an ethics task force are generally understood to be: 
• to provide a forum for the discussion of ethical issues,  to promote ethics education in the organization,  to generate and review policy statements related to ethics, and 
• to provide case consultation to providers, patients, and their families facing ethical questions or conflicts. 
Example: ABC Health Plan wants to strengthen ethics in the care of its members, so it establishes an ethics advisory group (EAG). The EAG includes a broad crosssection of those working for or interacting with the plan, including ABC staff, network physicians, consumers, company purchasers, brokers, and external health system and ethical leaders. EAG meetings are held to discuss issues brought to its attention. In reaching its conclusions the EAG has sought to provide transparency about its decisions and policies. 
One issue discussed by the EAG was whether ABC should pay benefits for an erectile dysfunction drug. Some members of the EAG felt that such drugs, although approved by the FDA, were a lifestyle choice and that the costs should be borne by individual members. Other members thought such drugs should be covered because they restore a basic bodily function. After discussion, the EAG suggested that limited benefits be paid for such drugs, and while acknowledging the need for cost containment within the context of the overall organizational budget.3 
This example shows how a task force’s ethical analysis and discussion can make a meaningful contribution to tough decision-making about allocating plan resources. This approach makes such decisions deliberative and transparent and includes a wide range of stakeholders. 
Healthcare Providers 
Health plans also have an obligation to take steps to ensure that the healthcare providers employed or contracted by them behave ethically. Physicians and other healthcare practitioners have traditionally taken an oath of commitment to serve humanity through their profession. Typically derived from the ancient Hippocratic Oath, these oaths are viewed as a statement of medical ethics and further reinforce the provider’s responsibility to place the patient’s health above other considerations. (See an example below.) 
Healthcare providers are supported in their efforts to act ethically by institutions of their professions. Medical schools, nursing schools, and other professional schools provide training in healthcare ethics. The American Medical Association (AMA) includes ethics groups that focus on ways to improve patient care and the health of the public by examining and promoting physician professionalism. The AMA produces a Code of Medical Ethics. Other professional organizations have their own ethics groups and codes of conduct. 
The Hippocratic Oath—A Modern Version4 
I swear to fulfill, to the best of my ability and judgment, this covenant: 
I will respect the hard-won scientific gains of those physicians in whose steps I walk and gladly share such knowledge as is mine with those who are to follow. 
I will apply, for the benefit of the sick, all measures that are required, avoiding those twin traps of overtreatment and therapeutic nihilism. 
I will remember that there is art to medicine as well as science, and that warmth, sympathy, and understanding may outweigh the surgeon's knife or the chemist's drug. 
I will not be ashamed to say "I know not," nor will I fail to call in my colleagues when the skills of another are needed for a patient's recovery. 
I will respect the privacy of my patients, for their problems are not disclosed to me that the world may know. Most especially must I tread with care in matters of life and death. If it is given me to save a life, all thanks. But it may also be within my power to take a life; this awesome responsibility must be faced with great humbleness and awareness of my own frailty. Above all, I must not play at God. 
I will remember that I do not treat a fever chart, a cancerous growth, but a sick human being, whose illness may affect the person's family and economic stability. My responsibility includes these related problems, if I am to care adequately for the sick. 
I will prevent disease whenever I can, for prevention is preferable to cure. 
I will remember that I remain a member of society, with special obligations to all my fellow human beings, those sound of mind and body as well as the infirm. 
If I do not violate this oath, may I enjoy life and art, respected while I live and remembered with affection thereafter. May I always act so as to preserve the finest traditions of my calling and may I long experience the joy of healing those who seek my help. 
Written in 1964 by Louis Lasagna, Academic Dean of the School of Medicine at Tufts University, and used in many medical schools today. 
 
 
Notes 
                                                 
1 Adapted from Joan D. Biblo, Myra J. Christopher, Linda Johnson, and Robert Lyman Potter, 
Ethical Issues in Managed Care: Guidelines for Clinicians and Recommendations to Accrediting Organizations (Kansas City, Missouri: Midwest Bioethics Center, 1995), 3–4, 8, 11–12. Used with permission. Thanks to Prime Health Foundation of Kansas City, Missouri, for a generous grant to underwrite this project. 2  Ibid. 3
 Sources: ?Confronting Trade-Offs in Health Care: Harvard Pilgrim Health Care’s Organizational 
Ethics Program,? Health Affairs, Volume 26, Number 4, July-August 2007, pages 1129-1134; and 
?A Conversation with James Sabin, MD: When Values Clash,? Managed Care, November 2009, www.managedcaremag.com/archives/0911/0911.qna_sabin.html
The Evolution of Health Plans 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• define “managed care” and “health plan,”  identify three key factors in the evolution of health plans, 
• discuss how health plans have responded to the problems of high healthcare costs and reduced access to health coverage, and  
• list some of the components included in today’s definition of quality in health plans. 
You have no doubt heard the terms “health plan,” “managed care,” and perhaps also “healthcare management.” They are used in various ways, but in general they denote systems that integrate the delivery and financing of healthcare, various techniques used to manage the delivery and financing of healthcare, and organizations that employ these techniques. For the purposes of this course, we will define managed care (healthcare management) as the integration of the delivery and financing of healthcare within a system, plan, or organization that seeks to manage healthcare costs, access, and quality. Such a system, plan, or organization is referred to as a health plan, also called a managed care plan or managed care organization (MCO). 
What exactly does it mean to “integrate the delivery and financing of healthcare”? And how does a health plan manage healthcare costs, access, and quality? We answer these questions and many others in this course. We begin in this first module with an overview of how health plans have developed and the factors that affect their continued evolution. Note that in this first module we introduce a number of terms and concepts that may not be familiar to you—they will be explained in detail in the modules that follow.  

An Important Note on the Affordable Care Act (ACA) 
In March 2010 Congress enacted the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), more commonly called the Affordable Care Act (ACA) or simply referred to as healthcare reform. This legislation brings about major changes in our country’s healthcare financing system, including health plans, and we address it in this course: 
 In course modules, as we cover various aspects of health plans, we discuss provisions of ACA that will have an impact in those areas. 
 Near the end of the course, we offer an overview of ACA, explaining in broad terms how it will change the healthcare system and its impact on health plans. 
We emphasize two points: 
 The discussion of ACA in this course is not comprehensive. We briefly describe in general terms the main components of this very complex and lengthy legislation, with a focus on the elements that affect health plans. We do not cover all of the provisions of the legislation, which is hundreds of pages long, and for the provisions that we do address, we do not include all details and exceptions.  
 The new system and rules are evolving. Many details and important matters still remain to be decided as the law is interpreted, clarified, and implemented over the next few years. This module is based on what is known in late 2010. Students are encouraged to visit our website (www.ahip.org.) for developments. 


The Development of Health Plans 
We think of managed care and health plans as modern developments, but in fact early versions have existed since the beginning of the 20th century. A few historical milestones: 
• 1910. The earliest examples of health plans appeared in the form of prepaid group practices. These were healthcare systems in which plan members paid a monthly premium and in return received a wide range of medical services through an exclusive group of providers. 
• 1929. Blue Cross plans providing prepaid hospital care were established. 
• 1930. Blue Shield plans providing reimbursement for physician services were established. 
• 1954. Individual practice associations (IPAs), which contracted with physicians in independent fee-for-service practices, emerged as a competitive response to health maintenance organizations (HMOs), which were based on group practices. 
For many years health plans accounted for only a small fraction of all health coverage. But in recent decades they have grown dramatically, and they now cover a large portion of the U.S. population. There have been many reasons for this growth, but we will focus on three key factors: the HMO Act of 1973, consumer and employer demand, and government involvement. 
The HMO Act of 1973 
One of the most important causes of the expansion of health plans was the federal Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973. This legislation was designed to reduce the cost of healthcare by increasing competition in the health coverage market and to increase access to health coverage for individuals without insurance or with only limited benefits. The main features of the HMO Act are:  
• Federal qualification. HMOs were given the option of becoming federally qualified. To do so, they had to meet a number of standards related to minimum benefit packages, provider network adequacy, enrollee grievance systems, financial stability, and quality assurance. 
• Dual choice. Employers that offered indemnity health insurance to more than 25 employees had to also offer a federally qualified HMO (if an HMO requested it).  
• Federal funding. To encourage their development, grants and loans were made available to federally qualified HMOs. Funding could be used to expand the service area of an existing HMO or establish a new HMO. 
• State law exemption. Federally qualified HMOs were exempted from state laws that restricted their development. 
Although federal qualification was optional, many HMOs sought it because of the advantages mentioned above and because it could be cited as a “stamp of approval” in marketing. But on the other hand, in some ways it weakened the competitive position of qualified HMOs, since they had to meet the federal standards and traditional indemnity insurance or other health plans did not.  
From 1976 to 1996, the HMO Act was modified by a series of amendments. These gave health plans more flexibility in designing and marketing products and increased the emphasis on quality. Many of the standards for federally qualified HMOs were reduced or eliminated, and the dual choice mandate was repealed in 1995. 
The HMO Act played a major role in the early establishment and growth of HMOs, and although federally qualified status no longer carries the weight it had previously, some HMOs still maintain it. 
Consumer and Employer Demand  
HMOs had significant success in containing healthcare costs and holding down premium increases, and by the early 1990s consumers and employers sponsoring health coverage had come to embrace them. But a traditional HMO required members to receive healthcare only from providers affiliated with the plan (that is, in the plan’s network), and consumers became dissatisfied with this restriction. They wanted the lower cost of an HMO but more leeway in choosing providers. New health plan types were developed to address this demand. Two of the most important were PPOs and POS products. 
• Preferred provider organizations (PPOs) like HMOs, have a network of providers. But unlike traditional HMOs, they cover services delivered by nonnetwork providers, although the member pays a greater share of costs than for network care (typically higher copayments or coinsurance). And while traditional HMOs require members to obtain a referral from their primary care physician to see a specialist, PPOs generally do not.  
• Point-of-service (POS) products combine elements of traditional indemnity insurance with elements of health plans. Members do not have to choose how they receive services until they use them and may obtain care from network providers and/or non-network providers. However, as with a PPO, members pay more for out-of-network care. Visits to specialists may require a referral from a primary care physician. 
Consumers also wanted coverage of specialty healthcare, such as dental care, vision care, behavioral health, and prescription drugs, and employers wanted more costeffective ways of providing such benefits. In response, health plans developed specialty “carve-out” plans and products with specialized provider networks. Specialty coverage may be integrated into a comprehensive health plan or offered as stand-alone product. 
Around the beginning of the new century, health premiums began to go up again, and consumers and employers looked for new solutions. One approach is consumerdirected health plans (CDHPs). CDHPs are based on employer funding of a core set of benefits, employee financial responsibility, and increased accountability of the health plan and providers. Under a CDHP, the individual has both a health insurance plan with a high annual deductible and a tax-advantaged health savings account. He or she uses money from the account to pay for healthcare expenses before the high deductible of the health plan is satisfied, as well as other out-of-pocket healthcare costs, generally on a tax-free basis. This approach both makes possible a low premium and gives consumers an incentive to make prudent healthcare choices, as they pay much of the cost themselves. 
These and other health plan types and products will be discussed in the modules that follow.  
Government Involvement 
Government has long been involved in health insurance, at both the state and federal levels. For over a century, states have regulated insurance companies, including health insurers. They mandate or prohibit certain policy provisions, impose financial requirements, oversee sales and marketing, and enforce many other rules. The federal government has historically taken a secondary role, but it does enact legislation that affects insurers and health plans. As we saw, in 1973 Congress enacted the HMO Act. In 1996 it passed the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), which included a wide variety of requirements for health plans. And most recently, in March 2010, the Affordable Care Act (ACA), commonly referred to as healthcare reform, was enacted. This legislation will have a major impact on healthcare and health plans in the years to come. 
The government plays another important role in health plans—it is a major purchaser of health coverage, financing healthcare for millions of Americans through several programs. In 1965 the Medicare program for the elderly and disabled and Medicaid for the poor were established, followed in 1997 by the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). And the federal and state governments have long sponsored health coverage for millions of government employees and members of the military and their families. Government health coverage programs have helped drive the growth of health plans by increasingly turning to them as alternatives to traditional indemnity insurance. By 2010 approximately 11.1 million Medicare beneficiaries (24 percent) were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage health plan, 1 and about 70 percent of Medicaid enrollees received some or all of their healthcare through managed care.2 
Current Factors in the Evolution of Health Plans 
Now let’s turn our attention to current trends. The most important is the steady rise in healthcare costs. This has made it necessary for health insurance premiums to be increased, and that in turn has made it harder for employers and consumers to afford coverage. Health plans have responded to these problems with a number of solutions.  
Rising Healthcare Costs 
Spending on healthcare in the United States has been rising for many years, surpassing $2.3 trillion in 2008. This is more than three times the $714 billion spent in 1990 and about nine times the $253 billion spent in 1980. In 2008 U.S. healthcare spending was about $7,681 per resident and accounted for 16.2 percent of the nation’s Gross 
Domestic Product.3 What is driving this increase? Let’s look at some key factors. 
Technological and Pharmacological Advances 
New tests and treatments involving technology are constantly being developed, and new drugs are being invented. These advances have enabled doctors to prevent, cure, or manage a variety of medical conditions, allowing many people who just a few years ago might have died or lived with pain or severe limitations to live normal lives. But in many cases they are extremely expensive, and this has been a major component of cost increases. 
Demographic Changes 
The percentage of the U.S. population 65 or older continues to rise dramatically, and of course older people need more medical care than younger people. They frequently have chronic diseases that require ongoing treatment, medication, and therapy, and they often need nursing home care or home healthcare. And a very substantial portion of healthcare spending goes to people in their last few months of life, when long hospital stays (often in intensive care), multiple operations, and the use of technology are common.  
This increase in the elderly population will only accelerate with the aging of the Baby Boom generation, those born in the two decades after World War II. Birth rates were high in those years, so there are considerably more people in this age group than in younger or older generations. These people are now in late middle age, and in the next few years the oldest of them will begin to turn 65, creating a bulge in the elderly population and an increase in the need for medical care. 
Overutilization and Incentives 
Another major cause of high healthcare spending is unnecessary medical services. Many physicians, hospitals, and other healthcare providers are still compensated under the fee-for-service approach. This means that the more services they deliver, the more they get paid—in other words, in most situations they have a strong financial incentive to provide additional services, even when it is doubtful that these services are needed or useful. This problem is exacerbated by the fear of malpractice suits, which drives providers to order unnecessary tests and treatments just to make sure no one can accuse them of not doing everything conceivably possible. This is known as defensive medicine. 
Other Factors 
Commentators have pointed out a few other trends that contribute to higher healthcare spending. More Americans are overweight and physically inactive than in the past, leading to diseases such as diabetes and heart disease and to overall poor health. Some believe that widespread advertising of prescription drugs is creating an inflated demand for some products.  
The Uninsured 
As mentioned above, to cover greater healthcare costs health plans are forced to raise premiums—otherwise they would go out of business. This has made health coverage less affordable, both for employers and individuals. Businesses have had to stop sponsoring coverage or shift a larger share of the premium to employees. As a result, many people of modest means cannot afford health coverage. These people often wait until a medical condition becomes severe and then seek care in a hospital emergency room, and they do not receive ongoing treatment or screening for diseases. This drives healthcare costs even higher.  
The Response of Health Plans 
Health plans have sought to address the problems of high premiums and reduced access to coverage in various ways. 
• Provider compensation. Managed care generally seeks to replace fee-forservice compensation, which as we have seen gives healthcare providers incentives to deliver more services than may be necessary. Health plans use capitation and other compensation methods under which providers have incentives to avoid excessive services. Health plans are also able to negotiate lower payments to providers in exchange for supplying them with a large volume of patients. In this course we will study in detail health plan compensation of providers. 
• Management techniques. Health plans use a number of approaches to ensure that plan members are cared for in the most effective and cost-efficient way. Health plans emphasize preventing illnesses (much less costly than treating them). Utilization management is employed to ensure that the services patients receive are appropriate to their needs. Case management coordinates care to avoid overlapping services from different providers. Disease management helps patients with chronic conditions maintain their health and avoid serious episodes.  
• Consumer-directed health plans. CDHPs, described above, address high costs in two ways. Because they have high deductibles, insurers pay less in benefits and so can charge a lower premium, making them affordable to more people. And because individuals pay for their own care until they satisfy the annual deductible (which is typically a few thousand dollars), they have an incentive to use healthcare services wisely, not seeking care when it is not needed and choosing competitively priced providers and products. 
 Technology. A high priority of health plans is to reduce administrative costs in order to hold down premiums. One of the best ways of doing so is using technology to perform such functions as processing and paying claims, billing, enrolling new members, generating member identification cards, and maintaining information. Handling these operations electronically rather than manually lowers costs by reducing staffing requirements and improves quality and customer service by increasing accuracy and shortening processing time. Health plans are now expanding their use of automation into areas beyond core functions—for example, electronic medical records.  
Quality 
So far we have talked mostly about costs. But another important element in the evolution of health plans is quality. In the past quality was often narrowly measured in terms of the scope of services provided for a certain cost. Today quality is evaluated more broadly and includes such components as desired outcomes, preventive care, access to physicians (both primary and specialty care), patient satisfaction, and care for chronic illnesses.  
The Role of Employers 
Historically, employer-sponsored health coverage was traditional indemnity insurance. There were no networks, and employees were generally free to go to any healthcare provider they chose, so it was up to them to make judgments and decisions about provider quality. But as premiums rose, employers took a more active role in evaluating and selecting health plans for their employees, and in doing so they considered not only costs and services covered but a number of quality measures. Some employers have joined together to form purchasing coalitions to bargain more effectively for the lowest-cost and highest-quality healthcare.  
The Role of Accreditation 
Health plans have responded to the demand for quality by establishing quality management programs. They have also sought to demonstrate the quality of their operations to consumers, employers, and government agencies by obtaining accreditation from independent agencies. Two of the best known accrediting bodies are NCQA and URAC.  
 NCQA (the National Committee on Quality Assurance) has been accrediting health plans since 1991. Its mission is “to improve the quality of health care… through measurement, transparency, and accountability.”4 NCQA focuses on measuring results and sharing the information with consumers and the market. NCQA has also developed a variety of quality measurement tools, including the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). The large majority of  health plans use HEDIS to measure performance on important aspects of healthcare and service. 
 URAC (formerly the Utilization Review Accreditation Commission, now simply URAC) was originally formed to evaluate utilization review processes, but it has expanded into evaluating health plans and other healthcare entities. The stated mission of URAC is “to promote continuous improvements in the quality and efficiency of healthcare management through processes of accreditation and education.”5 
Quality management and accreditation (including NCQA and URAC) are discussed in more detail later in the course. 
Notes 
                                                          
1
  Kaiser Family Foundation. June 2010. “Medicare Advantage 2010 Data Spotlight—Plan Enrollment Patterns and Trends.” 
2
  Kaiser Commission. February 2010. “Medicaid and the Uninsured, Medicaid and Managed Care—Key Data, Trends, and Issues. 
3
  Kaiser Family Foundation, Health Research and Educational Trust. September 2009. “Employer Health Benefits 2009 Annual Survey.” 
                                                                                                                                                                             
4
  NCQA. www.ncqa.org. 5
 URAC. www.urac.org.  

2 	Basic Concepts of Health Insurance 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• define insurance and indemnity health insurance;  define risk, underwriting, and pricing; 
• explain fee-for-service compensation and deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments; and  identify the main cost control methods used by indemnity health insurance.  
Until the last few decades, most health coverage in the United States was indemnity insurance. Before we begin to learn about today’s health plans, it is important to understand some basic concepts of this traditional coverage. Why? Some health plans still retain certain characteristics of indemnity insurance, and many health plan designs and features were developed to address problems in indemnity insurance. Insurance 
Insurance is a way of protecting against the risk of financial loss. An individual or business enters into a contract with an insurance company by purchasing an insurance policy. The person or business pays a relatively small, fixed amount (a premium) to the insurer at regular intervals (such as monthly or yearly). In exchange, if the person or business incurs a financial loss covered by the insurance policy, the insurer makes a payment (a benefit) or payments  to cover or help cover this loss. (The insurer is said to “indemnify” the insured against the loss, hence indemnity insurance.) 
Insurance enables people to protect themselves against the possibility of losing a large, unpredictable amount of money by paying much smaller, set amounts over time. For instance, a homeowner can pay annual fire insurance premiums of a few hundred dollars so that if her home burns down she will not have to pay hundreds of thousands of dollars to replace it. 
In indemnity health insurance, if a person covered by a policy (an insured) incurs medical expenses covered by the policy, the insurer pays benefits to pay those expenses or reimburse for them. By paying monthly premiums, the insured protects herself against the risk of having to pay thousands, or tens of thousands, of dollars for treatment of a serious illness out of her own pocket.  
Individual and Group Insurance 
Insurance can take the form of individual or group coverage. In individual insurance a private person buys a policy from an insurer. He is the policyholder (the party to the insurance contract), he pays the premium, and he (and in some cases his dependents) are insured. In group insurance a business buys a policy that covers its employees, or an association or union buys a policy for its members. The policyholder is the business, association, or union; the employees or members and often their dependents are insured; and while employees or members may pay all or part of the premiums, they do so through the policyholder. 
Risk and Underwriting 
Risk 
In insurance, risk is the possibility of a covered financial loss. In health insurance, it is the possibility (or probability) that a person will incur a healthcare expense covered by the policy. While it is usually impossible to predict if and when a particular individual will need healthcare and how much that care will cost, it is possible to project with reasonable accuracy how much care will be needed by a sizable group of people over a certain period. Heath insurance works by bringing together such a group and collecting enough from them in premiums to pay for the care of those group members who need it. 
To charge enough in premiums to cover benefits (and other costs), an insurer must be able to predict the loss rate for a population of insureds—how much the insurer will pay in benefits. Insurers are able to project loss rates by looking at past populations of insureds with similar characteristics (age, gender, occupation, location, etc.), the illnesses and injuries they suffered, and the amount of medical expenses they incurred. 
Underwriting and Pricing 
Underwriting and pricing (rating) are the processes by which an insurer decides whether to offer a policy to an individual or group, and if so, on what terms and at what premium rate. The insurer seeks to ascertain the risk presented by an applicant, so that it can avoid unacceptable risks and charge a premium rate sufficient to cover the likely loss rate. 
In individual health insurance the underwriter seeks to find out whether the individual applicant has any health conditions or medical history that makes him much more likely than average to need medical care. If a person is very likely to need extensive care in the near future, the insurer may deem him uninsurable and decline to issue a policy. If he presents only a somewhat high risk, the insurer may issue a policy at a higher-thanaverage premium or exclude coverage for a preexisting condition. 
In group insurance the underwriter seeks to determine if the applicant group has any characteristics that make it likely to have a higher-than-average loss rate (see below). 
For large groups the underwriter may look at the group’s past health insurance claims as an indication of its future loss rate. If group’s loss rate is likely to be high, the insurer must charge a higher-than-average premium rate.  
Underwriters must be alert to the possibility of adverse selection (also called antiselection). Adverse selection can occur when people have the option of enrolling in health insurance or not. This happens in the individual market and in group insurance where employees pay all or part of the premium and therefore have the right not to participate. In such cases people who are more likely than average to become ill, because they are older or in poor health, are more likely to choose coverage. If this occurs, the covered group will have a higher-than-average loss rate, and if premiums are based on average loss rates, they may be insufficient to cover benefits. 
Note that the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA), commonly called healthcare reform, will have an important impact on underwriting and pricing. As of 2014 health coverage will generally have to be offered on a guaranteed issue basis—that is, an individual’s current health or medical history cannot be considered in the decision to offer coverage or in setting the premium. Preexisting condition exclusions will not be permitted (effective 2010 for children, 2014 for adults). However, these restrictions apply to broad health coverage; individual medical underwriting will still be used for specialized products such as long-term care insurance. (ACA is discussed in greater detail toward the end of the course.) 
Factors in Group Health Insurance Underwriting 
• Age. Older people of course incur more medical expenses than younger people, so an older-than-average employee group will have a higher-than-average loss rate. 
• Sex. Females incur more medical expenses than males, so an employee group that is majority female will have a higher-than-average loss rate. 
• Occupation/industry. Some occupations and industries involve dangerous activities or unhealthy conditions, and people engaged in them are more likely to suffer injuries or become ill. The loss rate for such employee groups will be high. 
• Location. Medical practices and prices vary from region to region, and costs are generally higher in cities than in rural areas. This may affect the loss rate of a group.  
• Group size. Larger groups spread risk over more people. As a result, larger groups tend to have a loss rate close to the average, while smaller groups are more likely to diverge from the average. 
• Participation. If only a small percentage of eligible employees choose to enroll in a group plan, the risk of adverse selection is high. That is, the insured group will likely include a disproportionate number of people who need healthcare. (For this reason insurers usually will not issue a policy unless a minimum percentage of employees enroll.) 
Basic Features of Indemnity Health Insurance 
Provider Choice 
In traditional indemnity health insurance, when an insured needs healthcare, she can go to any physician, specialist, hospital, or other healthcare provider she chooses. She does not have to use a provider affiliated with a network, nor will she pay more if she uses a non-network provider, as is the case in some health plans. 
Benefit Payment 
Under an indemnity policy, an insured receives care from a provider, the provider charges her for the services rendered, she submits to her insurer a claim (a request for payment based on the terms of the policy), and the insurer reimburses her. Or more commonly, the insured assigns benefits to the provider—under assignment of benefits, the provider bills the insurer directly, and the insurer reimburses the provider.  
Typically in indemnity insurance, the provider bills the insurer her usual fee for the service she performed, and the insurer pays this amount. This system is known as feefor-service (FFS). There are limits, however—typically, an insurer will not pay a fee considerably higher than the usual and customary charge for the service in the locality. 
Cost-Sharing 
While indemnity insurers generally pay providers’ fees, this does not mean that insurers cover all healthcare costs and insureds pay nothing. Indemnity health insurance policies generally have cost-sharing—insureds must pay a portion of the expenses they incur. In indemnity insurance cost-sharing usually takes the form of a deductible and coinsurance. 
• Deductible. The insured must pay a specified dollar amount of expenses covered by the policy before the insurer begins paying benefits. For instance, if a policy has a $500 annual deductible, each year the insured must pay for the first $500 of covered medical expenses. Once this is done (that is, the deductible is satisfied), the insurer pays benefits for any additional covered expenses for the remainder of the year.  
• Coinsurance. After the deductible is satisfied, the insurer pays a percentage of covered medical expenses, and the insured pays a percentage. For instance, the insured might pay 20 percent coinsurance and the insurer the remaining 80 percent. 
Example: Mark is covered by an indemnity health insurance policy. It has a $500 annual deductible and 20 percent coinsurance. At the beginning of the year, Mark is hospitalized and incurs $5,000 in medical expenses covered by his policy. What amount of these expenses will Mark pay? What amount will the insurer pay? 
Mark pays the first $500 (the deductible). Of the remaining $4,500, he pays 20 percent coinsurance, or $900, for a total of $1,400 dollars. The insurer pays the other $3,600. 
There is another form of cost-sharing, not typical of indemnity insurance but common in health plans—copayments. A copayment is a flat dollar amount a plan member pays for a certain service, not a percentage of the cost of that service. 
Example: Jake is a member of a health plan. Whenever he sees his primary care physician, he makes a $10 copayment. The amount is always $10 regardless of the actual cost of the services the physician provides.  
The purpose of cost-sharing is to hold down the cost of health coverage by reducing the amount the insurer pays in benefits, and also to give insureds an incentive not to use healthcare services unnecessarily. To return to the example of Mark, if he paid no costsharing, he would have no reason not to go to the doctor for every minor complaint and to request as many tests and services as the doctor would provide. But if he has to pay part of the cost of any healthcare services, he is likely to request care only when he really needs it.  
Cost Control 
As the cost of healthcare rose in the late 20th Century, causing health insurance premiums to go up, insurers took various steps to contain costs and hold down premiums. Some of these were successful and have been adopted by health plans, and others laid the groundwork for approaches used today.  
Coordination of Benefits 
A coordination of benefits (COB) provision of a health insurance policy is designed to prevent duplication of benefits when a person is covered by two policies (such as a child whose parents both have employer-sponsored coverage that includes dependents). Under a COB provision, one policy is considered primary and the other is secondary. The primary policy pays all the benefits it normally would, and if there are any expenses not covered by the primary policy but covered by the secondary policy, the secondary policy pays additional benefits. In this way, no benefits in excess of the actual expenses incurred are paid. 
Example: Amelia is covered by both her father’s and her mother’s employersponsored group health insurance policy. Amelia receives healthcare services costing $1,000, all of which are covered by both policies. Her father’s policy has 30 percent coinsurance, so it pays $700. Her mother’s policy has 20 percent coinsurance, so it pays $800. But both policies have COB provisions, and the father’s policy is the primary policy. So the father’s policy pays $700 (the normal benefit), and the mother’s policy pays $100 (the difference between the normal benefit and what has already been paid by the other policy). 
Increased Cost-Sharing 
Increasing deductibles and/or coinsurance has two affects.  
• It shifts healthcare costs from the insurer to the insureds, and because the insurer is paying less in benefits, it can charge a lower premium.  
• It increases the incentive that insureds have not to use healthcare services unnecessarily. This reduces healthcare expenditures, making it possible to hold down premiums. 
Example: Karen is covered by a group indemnity health insurance policy sponsored by her employer. The policy has a $500 annual deductible and 20 coinsurance. The premiums Karen and her employer pay have been increasing significantly every year. In an effort to hold down these increases, the insurer proposes increasing the deductible to $1,000 and coinsurance to 25 percent. Since the insurer will pay less in benefits, it will be able to charge less. So Karen and her employer will pay a lower premium, but Karen will pay more out of her own pocket for healthcare. And because she pays more, she has a greater incentive to seek care only when she really needs it. 
Increases in cost-sharing can be seen as a precursor to consumer-directed health plans, discussed later in this course. These plans have high deductibles, so that insureds have a strong incentive to use healthcare prudently and to choose the most cost-effective providers. 
Cost Containment 
Cost containment measures are designed to lower healthcare expenditures (thereby holding down health insurance benefits and premiums) by ensuring that the medical services provided to insureds are necessary, appropriate, and cost-effective. For instance, before nonemergency surgery is performed, a second opinion from another physician might be sought to make sure that the surgery is necessary and is the most medically effective and cost-effective way to treat the condition. Steps are also taken to see that the most appropriate and cost-effective levels of care and care settings are used—for instance, it may be just as medically effective and safe and much less expensive to perform a certain procedure on an outpatient basis rather than admitting the patient to a hospital. Many other cost-containment strategies, such as utilization management, medical management, and case management, are discussed later in this course. 
Preventive Care and Wellness 
In the past many indemnity health insurance policies did not cover some preventive care services, such as annual checkups, immunizations, and screenings for medical conditions. But it is relatively easy and inexpensive to prevent many conditions or cure them if they are detected early but difficult and expensive to treat them in later stages. Insurers began to realize that it is more cost-effective in the long run to pay for preventive care services and encourage insureds to use them. 
Insurers also began to take note of the correlation between behaviors such as smoking, lack of exercise, and overeating and certain medical conditions. In response, they began to establish wellness programs, which help pay for smoking cessation, fitness, weightloss, and similar programs. As with preventive care, wellness program are cost-effective in the long term. For instance, it costs much less to help an insured pay for a weight-loss program than to treat diabetes later.  
Conclusion 
As healthcare costs increased, companies offering indemnity health insurance took a number of steps to control expenditures and hold down premiums. But these measures did not prove to be sufficient. As a result, types of health coverage that integrate the financing and delivery of healthcare—such as health maintenance organizations (HMOs)—were introduced. And other types of health plans that monitor and control costs and quality in a variety of ways—such as preferred provider organizations (PPOs), point-of-service (POS) options, and managed indemnity plans—were developed. In this course we will explore the array of health plans available today. 

3 	Health Plan Benefits and Networks 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• give examples of health plan types and health plan products;  describe health plan benefits;  define “copayment,” “coinsurance,” and “deductible”; 
• discuss access to care in health plans, including the role of networks and primary care; and  describe briefly utilization management and quality management. 
In this module we will first review and expand on the definition of “health plan” and discuss some basic concepts and characteristics of health plans. Then we will look at health plan products, benefits, and cost-sharing; examine how health plan members access care, including through organized systems of care (networks); and briefly discuss utilization management and quality management. Health Plans 
We noted previously that the term health plan has many meanings. You will recall that we defined a health plan as the integration of the financing and the delivery of healthcare within a system that seeks to manage the cost, access, and quality of care. For this reason health plans may also be called managed care plans or managed care organizations. The term “health plan” may be used to refer to a single organization or to a company that offers several types of health insurance or health plan products. In this course, we will use the term “health plan” to refer to any entity that utilizes certain concepts or techniques to manage the cost, access, and quality of healthcare. 
Just as it is difficult to define a health plan, it is an equally complex task to describe and distinguish among the different types of health plans and health plan products. In some cases, the same term may be used to describe both a type of health plan and a type of health plan product. Examples of health plan types are health maintenance organizations (HMOs), preferred provider organizations (PPOs), and physician-hospital organizations (PHOs). 
Health Plan Products 
In an effort to meet changing customer demand for customization and flexibility of product options, health plans are offering more and different health plan product types and models. In general, there are some basic characteristics that distinguish the different types of products from one another. But product types are becoming less clearly distinguishable from one another, and there few rigid and absolute distinctions among different types. And it is likely that these distinctions will blur even further as the health plan industry continues to evolve. 
Examples of types of health plan products: 
• Health maintenance organizations (HMOs)—plans that typically utilize physicians as gatekeepers. 
• Preferred provider organizations (PPOs)—plans that usually contract at discount prices with physicians. 
• Point-of-service (POS) products—plans in which members do not have to select how to receive services until they use them. 
• Consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs)—plans that combine a health savings account with a high-deductible health insurance plan. 
There are also specialty health plan products for specific types of services and populations. Examples include:  dental HMOs and PPOs,   vision care HMOs and PPOs, 
• Medicare HMOs, and   Medicaid plans. 
Managed Care Techniques 
Health plan products vary in their use of managed care techniques, with a range from highly managed to minimally managed products. The cost-containment techniques described earlier are examples of some ways that health plans manage costs. Other managed care techniques include benefit design and cost-sharing structures, network structure, and various medical management practices (such as prior authorization, second opinions, and case management programs). Figure 3.1 illustrates the managed care continuum. 
Figure 3.1 
The Managed Care Continuum 

The Use of Managed Care Techniques and Concepts 

Less  
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
More 
Traditional 
 	Traditional with 	 	PPO 	 	POS 	 
HMO 
indemnity 
 	cost-containment 

health plans 
 	features 

All health plan products can be positioned between the two ends of the continuum. The farther to the right on the continuum a health plan is (for instance, an HMO), the more managed care techniques and concepts are practiced by the plan. As you learn more about the different types of plan products, you will begin to understand where each type of plan fits on the continuum. 
Regardless of where a plan product falls on the managed care continuum, all health plans have in common the ultimate goal of accessible, cost-effective, and quality healthcare. 
The Key Players 
There are key participants in health plans. These are organizations and individuals who are involved in the delivery, financing, and consumption of healthcare. The roles of these participants evolve as health plans mature and new types of health plan products are introduced. The key players in health plans include: 
• Providers—individuals and entities that provide healthcare services, such as physicians, nurses, hospitals, and laboratories. 
• Payors—organizations or individuals that finance or reimburse the cost of healthcare services, such as insurance companies, health plans, and the federal government. 
• Purchasers—organizations or individuals that pay the premiums for the healthcare plan, such as employers and individual insureds. 
• Members—individuals who are enrolled in a health plan and for whom the health plan provides healthcare services. 
In health plans, services are delivered through integrated systems of providers and the plans, with all of the key players working together. As we mentioned previously, the roles of these players are changing—roles have begun to overlap, and there are fewer distinctions between the roles of key players. For example, risk bearing (assuming the financial risks associated with the costs of care provided to members) has generally been associated with the payors, such as Medicare and Medicaid and insurance companies. But in coordinated healthcare delivery systems, providers share the role of “risk bearers.” The evolution of roles will certainly continue as health plans and products evolve.  
Health Plan Benefits 
Health plans typically provide a comprehensive benefits package. Health plan benefits (or the services and products that the health plan provides) are generally more extensive than those covered by indemnity insurance. Some typical benefits provided by health plans include: 
hospitalization physician services 
many outpatient services, including mental healthcare emergency care inside and outside the service area prenatal and well child care immunizations periodic health evaluations and examinations diagnostic services and lab test. 
 inpatient and short-term rehabilitation services and physical, occupational, and speech therapy  nursing home care 
The following are some services and terms typically found in plan benefits:  
• Primary care—general medical care, with a focus on preventive care and the diagnosis and treatment of routine injuries and illnesses, which is provided directly to a patient without referral from another physician.  
• Specialty care (secondary care)—medical care delivered by a specialist, including outpatient and inpatient services provided by acute care hospitals. 
• Specialist—a healthcare professional (usually a physician but may also be a dentist or other practitioner) who voluntarily limits her practice to a certain branch of medicine. A specialty may be based on specific services or procedures (such as anesthesia), specific body systems (neurology), certain types of diseases (oncology), or an age group (pediatrics or gerontology).  
• Referral—a recommendation by a physician and/or a health plan for a member to be evaluated and/or treated by a different physician or medical professional, who may be a primary care physician or a specialist. 
• Outpatient services—services provided by a hospital or other healthcare facility without the patient staying overnight. 
• Ancillary services—outpatient or auxiliary services that support the diagnosis and treatment of a patient’s condition; supplemental services needed along with other care. Included are laboratory work, pharmacy services, radiology, physical therapy, medical supplies, and other items. 
Preventive Care 
Health plans focus on improving the health of their members and typically place greater emphasis on preventive care than do indemnity plans. Examples of preventive care services include physical examinations, immunizations, well child care, and routine mammograms. Plans use benefit design to encourage members to utilize preventive care services and to seek care earlier. For example, typically in health plans members pay nothing or very little for preventive services, thereby removing financial barriers to their use. 
Mandated Benefits 
In some cases federal or state laws require that certain services be included in health plan benefits. These are known as mandated benefits. In 1965 there were only seven state-mandated benefits, but today most states have them. Before 1996 only state legislatures had established health insurance mandates, and these mandates applied only to traditional health insurance benefits within the state. But that year Congress passed the first-ever federal benefit mandates, requiring health plans and employers to cover a minimum maternity stay of 48 hours and to cover mental health services at the same level as physical healthcare services. We will discuss federal and state regulation in more detail later in the course. 
It is important to understand that if a benefit is defined as a mandated benefit, it must be included in the benefits of all insured products offered by all managed care organizations and health insurance companies. Cost-Sharing 
We introduced deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments in the last module. Let’s take another look. 

Copayments 
A copayment is a specific dollar amount that a member must pay to the provider out of her own pocket for a specified service at the time that the service is rendered. The amount is the same regardless of the actual cost of care provided. For instance, if a plan has a $10 copayment for a physician office visit, the member pays this amount whether the doctor provides only a few services or many during the visit.  
Copayment amounts generally vary by type of service. For example, preventive services may be fully covered by the plan with no copayment, while other services typically require copayments.  
Coninsurance 
The terms “copayment” and “coinsurance” are sometimes confused, but they have distinct meanings. While a copayment is normally a flat dollar amount (such as $50 per specialist visit), coinsurance is typically a percentage of the total cost of the service or product provided (such as 10 percent of the cost of a $700 test). Thus coinsurance is based on the total cost of the service while a copayment is not. 
Deductibles 
A deductible is a fixed dollar amount that an insured or member must pay for her healthcare, within some defined period, before the insurer or plan starts to pay benefits. For instance, an insured might have to pay the first $500 of her healthcare expenses each year before the plan begins paying benefits. There may be separate deductibles for specific services, and deductibles may vary depending on whether services are provided by a network or a non-network provider. 
While health plans may have deductibles, copayments, and/or coinsurance, cost-sharing requirements in health plans generally result in less out-of-pocket expense for the member than in most traditional indemnity plans.  
Access to Care 
Now that we have described the types of benefits found frequently in health plans, let’s learn how plan members access these benefits. Previously we defined “access” as an individual’s ability to obtain healthcare. The lack of access to care by many people was one of the main reasons for the recent healthcare reform in the United States. 
Health plans use networks to address some traditional and some new access issues. In health plans, healthcare is provided to members through networks of physicians, hospitals, and other providers. In this section we will introduce networks, discuss the use of primary care as an entry point to manage healthcare, look at the role of the physician in primary care, discuss issues of provider choice, and review how networks enhance access to care.  
Networks 
The physicians, hospitals, and other providers that a health plan has contracted with to deliver medical services to its members are often referred to as the plan’s delivery system or provider network. For most plans the network is an important part of plan design. Some plans or products require members to receive care only from providers in the network. With other plans or products, members may receive services from nonnetwork providers, but when they do their out-of-pocket expenses are higher. 
A health plan’s network is formed by the plan entering into contractual arrangements with specified providers. These contracted providers agree to furnish services to specified persons (members or enrollees) in exchange for specified payments. The contract between the plan and the provider also includes rules and obligations, including medical management, billing, etc. There are many variations to the contract, as different arrangements are needed for different types of health plans, products, and networks. 
One of the most important goals of a health plan is ensuring that members have convenient access to services. To provide good access, health plans must ensure that their network includes: 
 the right number of providers,  the right types of providers, and  providers in the right locations. 
The number of providers needed is sometimes based on ratios of physicians to members. The types of providers in a network are dependent on the type of plan or benefits offered. Finally, providers must be within reasonable proximity to members’ homes and/or workplaces. For added convenience and access, plans sometimes seek to combine a comprehensive set of services (such as medical, laboratory, and pharmacy) in one location. 
A health plan must validate that providers in its network meet standards for their particular profession. To accomplish this, health plans use various criteria, standards, and processes. These processes and other activities related to provider selection will be discussed in detail in the modules “Health Plan Structure and Management” and “Network Structure and Management.” 
Primary Care 
In health plans the role of primary care is very important. In its most general sense, primary care refers to general medical care and care that is provided directly to a patient without a referral from another physician. Primary care generally focuses on the prevention and treatment of routine injuries and illnesses.  
Primary care providers (PCPs) are typically family or general practitioners, internists, obstetricians/gynecologists, and pediatricians. Some plans allow for medical professionals such as nurses, nurse practitioners, or physician’s assistants. Primary care providers are also referred to as personal care physicians or personal care providers. 
In addition to providing primary care services, in many health plans the PCP serves as the member’s point of entry into the healthcare system, her first point of contact. The PCP also coordinates the healthcare services of her members, including determining when specialty care is needed and referring the member to a specialist provider. Other PCP roles may include managing and directing the member’s healthcare. PCP roles and responsibilities may be defined in the contract between the PCP and the health plan. The role of the PCP may vary depending on the health plan and product type. 
Example: Grace is a member of a PPO. She has chosen Dr. Cherie Mansetti, an internist, as her primary care physician. Grace sees Dr. Mansetti for digestion difficulties, which the doctor diagnoses as a medical condition involving her gallbladder. Dr. Mansetti refers Grace to one of the plan’s specialists, Dr. McCarty, for surgery. Dr. McCarty operates on her at a hospital in the plan’s network.  
Provider Choice 
A choice of providers is very important when individuals select a health plan and in member satisfaction with their plan. For this reason plans strive to make their networks attractive and comprehensive. In addition, many health plans offer products that allow for more open access and fewer restrictions. PPOs and POS products are examples of products with more open access to providers.  
Traditionally health plans have managed member access to healthcare services by either requiring members to use network providers or by providing financial incentives for them to do so. The following are examples of how this is accomplished in some plans: 
• Members are encouraged to use network doctors and providers by a benefit design that includes lower out-of-pocket costs for network care than for out-ofnetwork care. 
• Provider contracts are structured to include favorable financing and delivery provisions. 
Enhancing Accessibility of Care 
By their very design health plans enhance the accessibility of healthcare in ways that are not achievable under indemnity coverage. For instance, a plan’s cost structure may lower members out-of-pocket cost, and there is typically an emphasis on prevention and wellness. 
Cost Structure 
Traditional indemnity plans typically have high out-of-pocket costs, including significant deductibles and coinsurance, and this may create barriers to access to care. Health plans’ out-of-pocket costs are typically lower, so that care is more accessible.  
Primary Care, Prevention, and Wellness 
Health plans emphasize primary care, prevention, and wellness. Members are encouraged by benefit design to seek preventive healthcare such as mammograms, physical examinations, and screenings (for instance, for high cholesterol). Health plan primary care focuses on early detection and treatment, preventing illnesses or complications. Health plan benefit designs generally include incentives (such as lower copayments) for members to use PCP services. Some health plans give premium discounts or include benefit coverage for wellness programs, initiatives, and/or wellness results.  
Utilization and Quality Management 
Two additional concepts critical to healthcare management are utilization management and quality management. Both will be covered in detail in later modules, but you need some basic information about them before you begin your study of health plan types. 
Utilization Management 
Utilization management (UM) is managing the use of healthcare services so that patients receive necessary, appropriate, and high-quality care in a cost-effective way. UM includes a number of techniques: 
• Demand management—strategies designed to reduce the overall demand for and use of unnecessary healthcare services by providing plan members with the information they need to make informed healthcare decisions. 
• Utilization review—an evaluation of the medical necessity, appropriateness, and efficiency of healthcare services and treatments for a given patient. 
• Case management—an approach that identifies plan members with special healthcare needs, develops a strategy to meet those needs, and coordinates and monitors the delivery of necessary services. 
• Disease management—the coordination of diagnostic, preventive, and therapeutic measures to manage certain chronic conditions (such as diabetes and hypertension). 
These techniques can be applied to all components of a plan's healthcare delivery system, including primary care, specialist referrals, hospitalizations, drug use, and others. They may be conducted by the plan itself or by a third-party organization specializing in UM. 
Quality Management 
Quality management (QM) is an organization-wide, ongoing process of measuring and improving the quality of the healthcare and services a health plan provides to its members. Most health plan QM programs have the following features: 
• Oversight. Most health plans assign overall responsibility for QM to a senior executive, who typically heads a QM oversight committee. 
• Credentialing. Health plans evaluate the credentials of providers before permitting them to join their networks. 
• Measuring and improving care. Plans measure the quality of the care provided by their providers and seek to improve it in various ways, including outcomes studies, provider profiling, clinical practice guidelines, benchmarking, peer review, and member surveys. 

• Members’ rights and complaint resolution procedures. Most health plans have a written policy stipulating members’ rights and responsibilities and a formal system for addressing complaints. 
 
 
Page 
4 	Provider Compensation 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 discuss the problems presented by fee-for-service (FFS) compensation of healthcare providers and how capitation addresses those problems;  explain how capitation works;  describe other provider compensation arrangements used by health plans;  describe withholds, risk pools, and pay for performance (P4P) programs; and  compare compensation arrangements in terms of the risk assumed by providers.  
As we learned in earlier modules, in traditional indemnity health insurance healthcare providers are generally compensated by fee-for-service (FFS). That is, when a provider performs a service for an insured, the provider bills the insurer her normal fee for that service, and the insurer pays. Health plans continue to use the fee-for-service approach in some cases, but they have also developed a number of other compensation methods, which we will discuss in this module. 
Incentives and Risk 
As we have mentioned briefly before, the fee-for-service approach creates a problem. The more healthcare services a provider delivers, and the more expensive the services, the more the provider is paid. Consequently, providers have a strong financial incentive to deliver more care, and they have few incentives to avoid unnecessary services. Combined with the need many physicians feel to perform unnecessary tests and treatments to make sure they cannot be accused of not doing everything conceivably possible (defensive medicine), this creates strong pressure for the overutilization of healthcare and drives up costs. Also, FFS gives physicians no financial incentives to focus on preventive care or promote wellness, since it is only when people get sick that they are paid. 
In response to this problem, other provider compensation methods have been developed and are used by health plans. These methods give providers incentives to deliver care in a cost-effective way, avoid unnecessary services, and promote prevention and wellness. One of the main ways they do this is risk-sharing. In the context of health plans, financial risk is the possibility that plan members will need more healthcare than projected, resulting in a financial loss. A health plan collects premiums from members and purchasers such as employers. Premium amounts are set to cover the level of healthcare services that the plan’s members are expected to need. If members need more services than projected, the premiums collected may not be sufficient to cover costs, and the plan suffers a financial loss. Under fee-for-service compensation, healthcare providers do not share this risk—if insureds need more services, the providers deliver them and bill the insurer for them, and the insurer pays the additional cost. But under other forms of compensation, providers do share risk, and this gives them an incentive to hold down costs, as we will see in this module. 
Why do providers accept these other forms of compensation and the risk they entail? Because of the volume of patients health plans can offer. To become a participating provider with a health plan, a provider may have to accept a compensation arrangement that pays somewhat less for services that she normally charges and that requires her to assume a certain amount of risk. But doing so gives her access a large population of patients, so that participation is financially advantageous for her. 
Capitation 
How Capitation Works 
Capitation is a provider compensation method that is very different from fee-for-service. Under FFS a provider is paid based on the number of services she provides and the cost of those services. Under capitation the provider is paid based on the number of people she cares for (she is paid “per capita,” meaning “per person”), regardless of how many services she provides to them or what those services cost. More specifically, a health plan pays a provider a set amount (a capitation rate) for each plan member under her care for each time period. In exchange, the provider must deliver whatever healthcare services are needed by those members during that period. Whether the provider delivers many services or few or none, she receives the same amount. 
Most commonly, a capitated provider is paid on a per member per month (PMPM) basis. For example, a plan may pay a primary care provider a certain dollar amount per month for each plan member assigned to her. In return for that PMPM payment, the PCP must provide whatever primary care those members need.  
Risk and Incentives 
Under FFS, as we have seen, a provider assumes no risk. If insureds need more services that expected, she delivers them and is paid for them. Under capitation, on the other hand, providers do bear risk. If members need few or no services, a provider will have to do little for her capitation payment, but if they need a lot of care, she will have to deliver many services and will not be paid any more.  
This risk-sharing gives capitated providers a strong incentive to avoid unnecessary services and control costs. And it promotes healthcare quality as well, because physicians also have a strong incentive to promote prevention and wellness—it is in the doctors’ interest for the members assigned to them to stay healthy so that they do not need services and for sick patients to get well soon and avoid complications and more expensive treatments. 
Capitation Considerations 
In addition to PCPs, other physicians including specialists may be compensated by capitation. So may groups of physicians (including multi-specialty groups) as well as hospitals. When an organization such as a group practice is paid by capitation to provide care for a plan’s members, capitation may cover primary care only, or primary and specialty care but not ancillary services, or all services. 
In designing capitation arrangements for PCPs, a plan must decide what services will be considered primary care and therefore covered by the capitation payment and stipulate these services in the provider contract. Likewise, if a hospital is paid by capitation, the contract must clearly set forth what services are included. 
A hospital that accepts capitation for providing the care needed by a health plan’s members assumes a considerable amount of risk—if members need more hospital care than expected, the hospital will be responsible for providing it without additional compensation from the plan. Consequently, such a hospital must have a strong program to manage utilization, and it may purchase stop-loss insurance, which covers costs if expenditures go above a certain level.  
As we have seen, some health plans (such as PPOs and POS plans) allow members to receive care from non-network providers. This can create a situation in which a plan is paying a provider a capitation payment to provide the care needed by a member, but in fact the member is receiving services from a non-network provider instead. Various adjustments may be made to account for out-of-network care. 
Trends in Capitation 
In the early decades of managed care, when most health plans were HMOs, capitation was a very common form of compensation. But as we saw in Module 1, in the 1990s PPOs and other plan types became more popular, and they tend not to use capitation. 
As a result, currently only a small minority of physician compensation is capitated. However, as healthcare costs continue to rise and policymakers and health plans seek ways to control them, capitation is getting another look, and many proposals for reform of provider compensation include elements of capitation, often blended with other approaches. So capitation may play a greater role in the future.1 
Other Compensation Arrangements  
In addition to traditional fee-for-service and capitation, there are a number of other compensation arrangements between health plans and providers. 
Fee Schedule 
A health plan may pay providers on a fee-for-service basis but limit the amounts paid by means of a fee schedule. This is a list of healthcare services and procedures with the maximum amount that the plan will pay for each service. This approach is also referred to as fee maximums, capped fees, or fee allowances.  
Providers serving a plan’s members agree to charge the plan no more than the maximum listed in the fee schedule and to accept that amount as payment in full. This means that providers may not engage in balance billing of members. For instance, if a doctor normally charges $100 for a service, but a plan’s fee schedule allows only $85, the doctor must accept the $85 as payment in full and may not charge the member the remaining $15. Thus, although this is a form or fee-for-service, the provider accepts some degree of risk—while the allowable fee will normally cover the cost of providing a service, if it does not, the provider must bear the cost. 
A fee schedule is typically based on usual, customary, and reasonable (UCR) fees. A UCR fee for a service is the amount commonly charged for the service by physicians in the region, and health plans may determine UCR fees by collecting data on physician charges. 
Discounted Fee-for-Service  
Another common compensation arrangement is discounted fee-for-service. The plan pays the provider the UCR fee for a service minus a negotiated percentage discount. As with a fee schedule, the provider agrees to accept this amount as payment in full and so accept as certain degree of risk.  
Relative Value Scale 
Some plans use a relative value scale (RVS). The plan gives a numerical value to each medical procedure or service. This value is multiplied by a dollar amount negotiated by the plan and providers, yielding a payment amount. For example, a plan rates the value of a particular service as 5 and another service as 7. It multiplies these values by $11 dollars (the dollar multiplier agreed to by the plan and providers) and pays $55 for the first service and $77 for the second. 
Simple RVS systems tend to give a high value to medical procedures (such as surgery) and a relatively low value to other activities such as seeing patients in office visits or researching patients’ condition. To address this problem, the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS) was developed. RBRVS seeks to take into account all the resources that physicians use in providing care to patients, including not only physical and procedural resources, but educational, mental, and financial resources as well. 
Salary  
In some HMOs some physicians are employees and are paid a salary. A salaried doctor generally assumes no risk—she is paid the same whether members need more or less care. However, some HMOs use withholds or other arrangements (see below) to share risk with employee-physicians, and many offer incentive payments to doctors who meet cost-effectiveness or quality goals. 
Diagnosis-Related Groups (DRGs) 
The federal Medicare program developed the Diagnosis-Related Group (DRG) system for compensating hospitals, and some health plans use it as well. When a member is hospitalized, her case is classified as one of about 500 DRGs based on her diagnosis, her age and gender, the procedures to be performed, and any complications or other medical conditions. Cases in the same DRG generally require about the same amount of hospital resources, and a fixed payment amount is set for each DRG based on average costs. The hospital is paid the DRG rate for the hospitalization, regardless of how long the stay actually lasts or how much it costs the hospital. This means that the hospital assumes risk—it must bear the cost if expenditures exceed the DRG rate. 
Per Diems  
A health plan may pay a hospital a fixed per diem amount for each day a plan member is in the hospital, regardless of the services used. The amount may be higher for some types of care (such as intensive care or cardiac care), and sometimes a higher amount is paid for the first day, as this is often the most costly for the hospital.  
The per diem amount is negotiated by the plan and the hospital. The more patients a plan provides to a hospital, the lower the per diem rate the hospital is likely to agree to. As with a DRG rate, the hospital assumes risk and bears the cost if expenses are greater than the per diem amount. 
Episode-Based Payments 
A compensation method that is being developed and drawing increased interest is episode-based payments. The health plan pays a single amount for all the services associated with a single episode of care, such as a hospitalization. For example, one payment might cover a surgical procedure, the associated hospital stay, and all related care for 90 days after discharge from the hospital. This payment would be shared by the hospital, the surgeon, and other providers involved in the case. 
Episode-based payments encourage doctors, hospitals, and others to work together to coordinate their services and avoid overlap and waste. They also promote longer-term accountability—if providers must pay for any care needed for 90 days after the patient leaves the hospital, there will be strong incentives to avoid complications that might require additional care or even readmission. The main challenges to this approach are getting hospital, physicians, and other providers to work together and to equitably distribute the payment among them.2 
Multiple Compensation Methods 
Note that health plans typically use different compensation arrangements for different types of providers. For example, a plan might use capitation for PCPs, discounted feefor-service for specialty physicians, and per diem payments for hospitals.  
Other Compensation Provisions 
Some other provisions can be used in conjunction with the compensation arrangements described above, to further share risk and give providers incentives to provide costeffective, high-quality care.  
Withholds 
A withhold may be used with some compensation arrangements. For example, a health plan pays PCPs by capitation, but each month it does not pay a certain percentage of the capitation payment. At the end of the year, if the number of referrals by PCPs to specialists has been as projected, the withheld money is paid to the PCPs. But if there have been many referrals, the plan uses all or part of the withheld funds to cover the cost, and the PCPs do not receive it. A withhold may also be used for salaried physicians. 
What is the purpose of such a withhold? Since capitated providers receive the same payment regardless of the amount of services they deliver, some may be tempted to reduce their workload by referring patients they could treat themselves to a specialist. A withhold gives them an incentive to avoid this. It also gives them an incentive to focus on preventive care and wellness so that their patients do not develop the need for specialty care. 
Risk Pools 
Risk pools are another way of giving providers an incentive to deliver care themselves and to promote prevention and wellness so that the need for non-primary care does not develop. For example, a plan pays monthly capitation payments to PCPs, and it also pays monthly capitation payments into three pools, one for specialty care, one for hospital care, and one for ancillary services. The money in the pools is used to cover the costs of these services, but if members do not use many services and there is money left over, some of it is distributed to the PCPs. On the other hand, if members need many services and the money in the pools is insufficient, physicians may have to make up part of the shortfall. 
Pay for Performance (P4P) Programs 
Many health plans have pay for performance (P4P) programs. Targets are set for measures of physician performance, which may be in the areas of quality of care, patient satisfaction, utilization, or cost-effectiveness. If a doctor meets these targets, he is rewarded, typically by means of a percentage increase in compensation or a bonus. Some plans share with physicians meeting the targets the savings realized through costeffectiveness efforts. Most P4P programs give physicians report cards showing how they are doing in relation to the targets and what they can do to meet them. Targets may be based on nationally developed and recognized measurements or may be developed by the plan itself. 
P4P has been widely adopted in the healthcare industry and is being touted as an important way of promoting high-quality and cost-effective care. So far these programs have had some positive impact but have not resulted in major improvements. P4P programs are evolving, and many details are still being worked out, such as identifying and obtaining the most relevant data and setting incentives payments at the right level to influence physician behavior.3 
The Risk-Sharing Continuum 
The provider compensation arrangements discussed in this module can be seen as falling on a continuum based on the degree of financial risk borne by providers—that is, the extent to which, if the care needs of plan members are greater than expected providers must bear the cost. 
At one end of the spectrum is traditional fee-for-service, under which providers bear no risk. If plan members need more services, providers deliver them and charge the plan for them. The plan must cover all costs with the premiums it receives, and if costs exceed premiums, the plan suffers a loss.  
At the other end of the spectrum is capitation, under which providers bear most of the risk. They receive the same payment whether the members they are responsible for require no care, a few services, or many services. If members need much more care than expected, providers must deliver it without any extra compensation. Meanwhile, the plan bears relatively little risk, as its costs are fixed—the set PMPM fees it pays providers.  
Between these two extremes are the other arrangements we have looked at. Under fee schedules, discounted fee-for-service, and RBRVS, a physician receives a set amount for a service; this amount is calculated to cover his costs, but if it does not, he must cover any extra himself—he may not bill the plan or the member for any more. Thus he incurs a certain amount of risk. Per diems and DRG rates for hospitals are similar—they are flat rates intended to cover costs, but if they do not, the hospital must bear any additional cost and so assumes some risk.  
Salary compensation is near the no-risk end of the continuum. Employee-physicians receive the same salary whether members need few or many services, and they do not bear any losses if costs are high. But as noted, withholds and other arrangements may be used to share some risk with salaried doctors.  
Notes 
                                                 
1
 Samuel H. Zuvekas and Joel W. Cohen. “Paying Physicians by Capitation: Is the Past Now 
Prologue?” Health Affairs 29, no. 9 (2010), 1661-1666. Available at http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/29/9/1661.full.html  
2
 Robert E. Mechanic and Stuart H. Altman. “Payment Reform Options: Episode Payment Is a 
Good Place to Start.” Health Affairs 28, no. 2 (2009), w262-w271. Available at http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/28/2/w262.full.html  
3
 Cheryl L. Damberg, Kristiana Raube, Stephanie S. Teleki, and Erin de la Cruz. “Taking Stock of 
Pay for Performance: A Candid Assessment from the Front Lines.” Health Affairs 28, no. 2, 
(2009), 517-525. Available at http://content.healthaffairs.org/content/28/2/517.full.html  

5 	The Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  summarize the key elements of HMO membership and benefits,  describe HMO network arrangements,  explain how HMOs are paid and pay their providers, and  discuss utilization management and quality management in HMOs.  
A health maintenance organization (HMO) is a health plan that assumes or shares both the financial risks and the delivery risks associated with providing comprehensive medical services to a voluntarily enrolled population in a particular geographic area, usually in return for a fixed, prepaid fee. In other words, an HMO arranges for the delivery of medical care and provides, or shares in providing, the financing of that medical care. An HMO may be owned or sponsored by many different types of organizations and may be for-profit or not-for-profit. 
Historically, HMOs were called prepaid group practices, although they were formed as corporations. The laws of most states require an HMO to be organized as a corporation rather than a partnership or other legal entity. Most HMOs must be licensed in the states in which they are incorporated, and they must comply with statutory requirements for HMOs in each state in which they do business.  
Background 
Although predecessors to HMOs have been in existence for over 70 years, HMOs became popular during the 1970s as a result of federal legislation. The HMO Act of 1973 removed many of the market barriers that constrained the development of HMOs. The Act and its amendments also established requirements that an HMO could voluntarily meet to become federally qualified. Federal qualification preempted the application of certain state laws to HMOs. To be federally qualified, an HMO could not exclude preexisting conditions and had to offer the following: 
 healthcare delivery in a geographic service area,  both basic and supplemental healthcare services, and   voluntary membership to an enrolled population.  
The Act also required dual choice in employer-sponsored health plans, which we discussed previously. Many HMOs pursued federal qualification because it gave them access to employers in their markets. Federal financial assistance, in the form of grants and loans, was made available from 1973 until 1981. 
In 1995 federal law eliminated the dual choice requirement, and because of this change and the discontinuation of federal grants, HMOs now have fewer incentives to become federally qualified. However, federal qualification is still important for Medicare and large employer contracts. 
HMOs are heavily regulated at both the federal and state levels to ensure solvency and member access to quality medical care. An HMO may have to have a license as an HMO or insurance company (called a certificate of authority or COA) in each state in which it conducts business. Most HMOs are subject to state enabling statutes and the requirements of various state health departments or state departments of insurance. 
Characteristics of HMOs 
The following are key characteristics of HMO operation, organization, and provision of healthcare and insurance coverage: 
 tight relationships with providers,  an emphasis on the role of primary care providers (PCPs),   the utilization of a referral management process,  an emphasis on prevention and wellness, and  often, an integration of insurance and the provision of healthcare services. 
These characteristics enable an HMO to provide access to quality, affordable care through a coordinated system. One measure of an HMO’s quality is its accreditation by independent accrediting agencies such as NCQA (the National Committee for Quality Assurance). Employers and other purchasers and payors of healthcare benefits normally consult these agencies as part of their health plan selection process. 
What do employers consider in evaluating and selecting HMOs? Access to care, cost, and member satisfaction are almost always important. Most employers also take into account the financial strength of an HMO, the reputation of its networks, and the ease of doing business with it. Many also consider such things as care outcomes, the focus on prevention and wellness, NCQA accreditation, historic cost trends, the ability to approve health status, physician turnover, physician credentialing, and Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS) reports. 
Membership and Enrollment 
Most commonly a person becomes a member of an HMO by enrolling in an employersponsored group plan. Under such a plan, a member has no contractual relationship with the HMO; the contract is between the HMO and the employer. But individuals may also join an HMO on their own, and this is a growing market for HMOs. These persons contract directly with the HMO and receive benefits on an individual basis. Members of an HMO include both subscribers (who are eligible to enroll directly) and their dependents (whose eligibility is contingent on that of the subscriber). 
Traditionally HMOs were marketed to employer groups with more than 100 employees. But today HMOs serve large groups, small groups, and individuals. Members range from the very young to the very old, and from the very healthy to the chronically ill. Many Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries join HMOs. 
Employers sponsoring HMOs usually have an annual open enrollment period, usually 30 days, during which employees select their healthcare coverage. During this period the HMO automatically accepts those employees who wish to enroll or to switch to the HMO from another plan offered by the employer. Employers and HMOs also allow new employees to enroll during an initial enrollment period. 
Federally qualified HMOs and some state-licensed HMOs must cover preexisting conditions for all eligible employees and dependents who enroll during their initial enrollment period. However, under the Affordable Care Act (ACA, commonly called healthcare reform), all health plans (not just some HMOs) will have to cover preexisting conditions (effective 2014).  
Benefits 
HMOs provide comprehensive medical benefits. By law federally qualified HMOs must provide a stipulated minimum set of benefits, and some states require HMOs to offer certain benefits to meet licensing requirements. In addition to medical coverage, most HMOs cover special services and products such as vision care, dental care, mental healthcare, and prescription drugs. HMOs typically require lower member cost-sharing than other plan types. 
HMOs historically have focused on preventive care and wellness. While they also rely on disease management and other approaches to controlling costs, they recognize that prevention is the best method of healthcare cost containment. 
The preventive care programs of HMOs are typically extensive. Routine physical examinations, 24-hour telephone access to a nurse, prenatal care, well-baby care, and childhood immunizations are common preventive care services offered. And because HMOs strongly emphasize prevention, these services are often covered in full, although a small copayment for an office visit may be charged. (However, under ACA, as of 2014 most health plans will no longer be allowed to charge cost-sharing for preventive services.) HMOs may also provide members with medical information through seminars, newsletters, and self-help medical booklets. 
HMOs often give their members access to wellness programs, such as for smoking cessation, weight management, and stress management. Some HMOs contract with local health clubs to make exercise facilities and equipment available and affordable to members. 
By offering a comprehensive set of benefits, an HMO promotes comprehensive care. And by coordinating care across various areas, an HMO ensures that its members receive quality, cost-effective, and appropriate medical care on a timely basis. An HMO also provides convenient, usually local, access to preventive care without significant financial cost. 
Networks 
HMOs deliver comprehensive medical care to their members by entering into negotiated contracts with providers to form a network. Alternatively, an HMO may own the facilities and employ the physicians in its network. The network providers, including physicians, hospitals, and ancillary service providers, deliver medical care to HMO members in exchange for negotiated compensation. 
Unlike the financing of healthcare, which may be conducted on a national or regional basis, the delivery of healthcare is primarily local. Providing members with convenient, local access to an HMO’s provider network is therefore critical to the relationship between the HMO and employers and other purchasers or payors. Some HMOs operate in only one geographic region, but others are national organizations that own or sponsor separate HMOs in different regions.  
In building and maintaining a provider network, an HMO considers the following: 
• Access—How many and what types of providers are needed? In what locations within the service area? 
• Credentialing—What credentials should be required and verified? How often should recredentialing and peer reviews be conducted? 
• Contractual relationships—Should the HMO own facilities or contract for their use? Should it employ providers or contract for their services? How should providers be compensated (for example, salary, capitation, discounted fee-forservice)? 
By contracting with specific providers to deliver care, an HMO seeks to increase quality control over medical care and decrease costs. Let us now examine the relationships between an HMO and the three key provider groups: physicians, hospitals, and ancillary service providers. 
Physicians 
The relationship between an HMO and its participating physicians is a contractual one, either direct employment or an independent contractor arrangement. As noted earlier, to establish a network that provides members with adequate access to medical care, an HMO must contract with sufficient numbers and types of physicians. 
An HMO determines the number of primary care and specialty care physicians needed in its network in part by considering the size and location of the geographic service area, criteria for network adequacy, the medical needs of its members, and employer or other purchaser requirements, including provider education, board certification, and work history. 
Before an HMO contracts with a physician, the HMO first verifies his or her credentials. After becoming part of the network, the physician is subject to recredentialing and ongoing peer review. Credentialing, recredentialing, and peer review enable an HMO to establish and maintain quality standards of clinical competence, professional conduct, and practice management. 
The Role of Primary Care Providers 
Most HMOs require their members to select a primary care provider (PCP) from the HMO’s network. Recall that a PCP is usually an internal medicine or family medicine practitioner for adults and a pediatrician for children. Some HMOs also utilize nurse practitioners or physician assistants in the primary care function. 
In addition to providing primary care services, in HMOs the PCP serves as the member’s point of entry into the healthcare system. Usually to see a specialist an HMO member must obtain a referral from her PCP. But some HMOs allow members with specified conditions to contact certain specialists such as obstetricians directly instead of going through the PCP first.  

Out-of-Network Services 
Traditionally, an HMO did not cover medical care obtained outside its provider network. However, in response to member requests for greater provider choice and timely access to quality medical care, many HMOs now offer options, such as a point-of-service (POS) product, in which members may choose out-of-network providers, usually at a higher cost to the member. Some of these HMOs require members to obtain a referral and/or prior authorization to obtain coverage for out-of-network services. 
Hospitals  
HMOs negotiate contracts with hospitals and other inpatient facilities to provide medical services to their members. Again, the issues of access, credentialing, and contractual arrangement cited above come into play.  
Accreditation by The Joint Commission (TJC, formerly the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations or JCAHO) and verification of the existence of a state license are typically minimum requirements for a hospital to participate in an HMO network. Other factors that an HMO considers in contracting with hospitals include the level and cost of hospital services, the quality of the physicians on the hospital’s medical staff, the type of specialty facilities and services offered by the hospital, and member access within a geographic area. 
Ancillary Service Providers 
An HMO also contracts with ancillary service providers. Ancillary services are auxiliary or supplemental services that support the diagnosis and treatment of a patient’s condition. They include laboratory, radiology, and other diagnostic services; home health care; and physical and occupational therapy. An HMO contracts with the appropriate number and types of ancillary service providers so that its provider network includes the healthcare services that are commonly needed by plan members. 
An HMO may provide some ancillary services, such as laboratory services, in the facility where its PCPs see plan members. Other ancillary services are provided at separate facilities. Ancillary service providers must provide adequate access to their services and participate in an HMO’s quality management program. 
In a typical HMO, a PCP refers a member to ancillary providers for all services covered by the plan. And for certain ancillary services, such as physical or occupational therapy, an HMO may require a member to obtain prior approval from her PCP to continue the therapy beyond a specified number of treatments. 
Some HMOs use a specialty care provider for mental health and chemical dependency services. These specialists may be psychologists and social workers who complete initial assessments and conduct referrals to specified facilities. 
Financing 
Now let’s look at how an HMO finances healthcare. We will examine first how an HMO is paid for providing healthcare by its members, sponsoring employers, and other payors (prepaid care), and then how the HMO pays its providers for delivering that care (provider compensation).  
Prepaid Care 
An HMO usually has a prepaid care arrangement. Typically a monthly premium of a fixed amount is paid in advance of delivery of care. This premium may be paid by members, sponsoring employers, other payors such as the government, or a combination. The premium generally covers most healthcare services that a member might need, no matter how many services the member uses or how often. 
Although HMOs typically do not have deductibles or coinsurance, they usually have small copayments for some services. For instance, an HMO may require its members to pay a $10 or $15 copayment for each doctor’s office visit or prescription or $50 for an emergency room visit. 
Provider Compensation 
An HMO negotiates compensation arrangements with its providers, and there are a variety of reimbursement methods. Compensation arrangements are one of the features that distinguish the various HMO models from one another. Let’s look at the compensation arrangements typically used with physicians, hospitals, and ancillary service providers.  
Physicians 
Typical compensation arrangements for physicians include capitation, several forms of fee-for-service (FFS), and salary. Capitation is widely used for primary care providers. To gain the active involvement of PCPs in risk-sharing and utilization management, many HMOs use withholds or risk pools for nonprimary care. An HMO may have a risk pool for each broad category of care (such as specialty care, inpatient care, and others), with the risk-sharing and reward-sharing arrangements usually differing among these pools. 
In some HMOs physicians are employees and are paid a salary. Salaried physicians expect to earn an income, including benefits, equivalent to that available in the local market. Benefits that may be considered in physician contract negotiations include: salary, short-term sick leave, vacation leave, profit-sharing plans, retirement plans, professional dues and membership fees, reimbursed business-related expenses, disability income insurance, malpractice insurance, and life and health insurance. Nonfinancial benefits available to salaried physicians include access to patients and may include time off for research or volunteer work, compensatory time, and limitations on on-call time or total weekly or monthly work hours. 
Hospitals 
HMOs reimburse hospitals in several ways, including FFS, discounted FFS, DiagnosisRelated Groups (DRGs), per diem rates, and capitation. Often included in the compensation agreement between an HMO and a hospital are financial incentives such as service bonuses, quality bonuses, and risk pools. Sometimes HMOs use financial disincentives when providers exceed utilization goals.  
Hospitals that are reimbursed under capitation or DRGs (as well as physicians who are capitated) may negotiate a stop-loss provision in their HMO contracts. This specifies that, once a provider’s total costs have reached a certain level, additional costs will be reimbursed under a different payment method, such as discounted FFS. 
Factors that determine an HMO’s compensation arrangements with hospitals include state laws and regulations, market competition, hospital ownership of the HMO, and the level of predictability, supported by valid data, associated with hospital utilization. 
Ancillary Service Providers  
Compensation arrangements for ancillary service providers include capitation and discounted FFS. For discrete services such as diagnostic testing, capitation may be best; for more open-ended services, such as home health care and hospice care, a combination of capitation and discounted FFS fees may be more appropriate. 
Capitation enables an HMO to share risk with providers and to manage costs. In exchange for accepting capitation, ancillary service providers receive a large referral base and a stable income flow. 
Utilization and Quality Management 
Utilization Management 
An HMO manages physician utilization through capitation, risk pools, and physician practice guidelines. These techniques shift part of the utilization management function to providers.  
To manage member utilization of healthcare services, HMOs use referral management (monitoring specialist referrals), copayments, and alternatives to emergency care, such as nurse advice lines and subacute clinics.  
For utilization management in a hospital setting, HMOs employ precertification for inpatient hospitalization, concurrent and retrospective reviews of admissions, inpatient utilization review, discharge planning and readmission prevention (including posthospitalization follow-up), and case management.  
A key to ensuring efficient and appropriate utilization and quality care is informationsharing among PCPs and other providers within an HMO.  
Federal regulations may require HMOs to adhere to certain utilization standards. For example, an HMO that enrolls Medicare or Medicaid beneficiaries must comply with the utilization management requirements set forth by the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Accreditation organizations and state enabling statutes may also require an HMO to provide evidence of its utilization management program. 
Under ACA, as of 2012 there will be another potential role for HMO-like organizations in the Medicare program. Accountable care organizations (ACOs) that voluntarily meet quality thresholds will share in the cost savings they achieve for Medicare. ACOs are similar to HMOs because they focus on narrow provider networks to incentivize quality outcomes. To qualify as an ACO, organizations must meet accountability standards related to overall care of Medicare beneficiaries, define evidence-based medicine, have adequate PCP participation, and report on their quality and cost outcomes. 
Quality Management 
HMOs use many quality management techniques. These include credentialing, recredentialing, and peer review for PCPs and specialists; accreditation standards for hospitals and ancillary services providers; and accreditation standards for the HMO itself.  
Because HMOs were among the first health plans, they are subject to strict regulation in regard to quality standards at both the state and federal levels. State enabling statutes require HMOs to submit evidence of a quality assurance program as part of the state licensing process. HMOs that enroll Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries must comply with CMS quality assurance requirements (and Medicaid requirements vary by state.) 
Employers also review an HMO’s accreditation status and its HEDIS measures to evaluate plan quality. Upcoming modules discuss utilization management and quality management in greater depth. 

Types of HMOs 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
 differentiate between closed and open panels and closed and open access,  describe the structure of the four main HMO models,  compare provider compensation under the four main HMO models, and  give some advantages and disadvantages of each of the four main HMO models. 
This module describes the most common ways of structuring an HMO. First we discuss the difference between closed and open provider panels and closed and open access to providers. Then we examine the four main HMO models: the independent practice association (IPA) model HMO, the staff model HMO, the group model HMO, and the network model HMO. We look at how they are structured, how they compensate providers, and their advantages and disadvantages. 
Concepts and Terms 
Before we begin our discussion of HMO models, let’s introduce some concepts and terms and review some others. 
Closed and Open Panels 
The term “panel” is used to refer collectively to the physicians who serve a health plan’s members. An HMO’s panel may be either closed or open. 
• In a closed-panel HMO, the physicians providing care to members are either employees of the HMO or members of a group of physicians that contracts with it. Other physicians are not allowed to join the HMO’s network. 
• In an open-panel HMO, any physician who meets the HMO’s standards is eligible to join the HMO’s network by contracting independently with it.  
It should be understood that while a physician who meets the criteria of an open-panel HMO is eligible to join it, the HMO has no obligation to contract with anyone. An openpanel plan may stop accepting new doctors if it already has enough to meet its members’ needs, and it may start accepting them again if a need develops. 
In a closed-panel plan, HMO physicians most commonly see only members of the HMO; in an open-panel plan, they typically see other patients as well. In the past most HMOs had closed panels, but this is no longer true. 
Closed and Open Access 
The terms “closed access” and “open access” are sometimes used along with closed and open panel, but they do not mean the same thing. 
• Closed access means that, to receive benefits, an HMO member must obtain care from network providers, not out-of-network providers. Also, to receive care from a specialist, even in-network, a member must obtain a referral from her primary care physician (PCP).  
• Open access (also called direct access or self-referral) means that a member may go to a specialist, either in-network or out-of-network, without a referral from her PCP (that is, she can self-refer). She will receive benefits, although benefits for non-network care may be lower than for network care. 
Traditionally, closed access was one of the main features that distinguished an HMO from other health plan types. But open access has become more common and closed access less so. Many consumers do not like having to go to their PCP (and paying a copayment for the office visit) in order to see, for instance, a dermatologist or allergist, and many HMOs have discontinued this requirement in an effort to meet consumer preferences and remain competitive. Also, although the PCP referral system was designed to help contain costs by managing utilization of specialty care, it is unclear if it achieves that goal. In some cases a referral requirement may even lead to a delay in treatment and higher costs. 
To sum up: “closed or open panel” refers to whether a physician can join an HMO’s panel (network); “closed or open access” refers to whether members can access nonnetwork care and whether they can access specialty care without a PCP referral. 
Provider Compensation 
In Module 4 we learned about some of the ways health plans compensate providers. Let’s review three of the most common: 
• Fee-for-service (FFS). A health plan pays a healthcare provider a fee for each service rendered to plan members, and the amount paid is the provider’s normal fee for that service. For instance, a doctor examines a plan member and has some tests done; she bills the plan her normal charges for these services, and the plan pays these amounts. Under FFS the more services a provider delivers, the more she earns. The risk is borne by the plan—if members use more services than expected, the plan pays the cost. 
• Discounted fee-for-service. A plan pays a provider a fee for each service rendered to plan members, but the amount is based on a discount off the normal charge. A set percentage may be subtracted from the provider’s regular fee or from the usual and customary fee for the service in the locality, or the amount paid may depend on a fee schedule (a listing of amounts to be paid for different services). Although the provider earns less than under regular FFS, as in regular FFS the more services she delivers, the more she earns. A provider is willing to accept discounted payment because affiliation with the plan brings her more patients, so that although she receives less per service she may have greater total earnings. As under regular FFS, the risk is borne by the plan. 
• Capitation. A healthcare provider is responsible for providing the healthcare services needed by certain members of a health plan; in return, for each time period the plan pays the provider a fixed amount per capita (per plan member served). For instance, a doctor agrees to provide primary care to members of an HMO, and the HMO pays the doctor a set dollar amount per member per month. Under capitation, the provider is paid the same amount regardless of the number or costs of the services she provides to plan members. The provider assumes risk—if members need many services and the cost of caring for them is higher than expected, the provider must bear the cost. 
The student may also want to refer to Module 4 for explanations of other compensation methods, such as the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS) and withholds. 
HMO Models 
There are models (basic types) of HMOs, distinguished largely by the contractual relationship between the HMO and its providers, including reimbursement arrangements. There are four main models:  
 the independent practice association (IPA) HMO,  the staff model HMO,   the group model HMO, and   the network model HMO. 
In addition, there is the mixed model HMO, which combines characteristics of two or more of these models. For instance, an HMO might use a staff model for primary care and a network model for specialty care. Most early HMOs were staff model or group model, but the current trend is toward the mixed model. Mixed model HMOs have evolved in response to employer and consumer demand for a flexible delivery system that combines the best features of different models. And as HMOs adopt various features from different models, distinctions among models become blurred, and it can be hard to classify a particular plan as belonging to one model or another. 
As mentioned in the last module, under healthcare reform (the Affordable Care Act) HMO-like organizations called accountable care organizations (ACOs) are expected to play a role, as are entities known as medical homes. We will discuss these in our module on provider organizations. 
IPA Model 
The most common HMO model today is the IPA model. An independent practice association (or individual practice association) is an association of physicians in independent practice. It is established primarily to give its members a vehicle for negotiating contracts with health plans. IPAs often include a variety of providers, including individual primary care physicians, individual specialist physicians, group practices, and multi-specialty group practices (for instance, including internists, family practitioners, pediatricians, orthopedists, and others). We discuss IPAs in more detail in a later module. 
In an IPA model HMO, each participating physician contracts with the IPA, and the IPA contracts with the HMO. The HMO pays the IPA, and the IPA pays its members. The IPA agrees to provide healthcare services to HMO members, and the IPA’s physicians become part of the HMO’s network, agreeing to adhere to the terms of the IPA-HMO contract. But IPA physicians remain independent practitioners who manage their own offices and medical records; they usually see other patients besides HMO members and may contract with other health plans. An HMO may contract with more than one IPA, and an IPA may contract with more than one health plan. 
An IPA model HMO may be established in different ways. 
• Sometimes physicians in an area form an IPA, which contracts with one or more HMOs or other health plans. 
• Sometimes the HMO and community physicians work together to create an IPA and recruit other physicians. In this case, the HMO and IPA typically have an exclusive contract—that is, the IPA cannot contract with other HMOs or health plans. 
• Sometimes a hospital establishes an IPA, which contracts with an HMO.  
Some IPAs have an open panel—all physicians who meet the IPA’s standards are eligible to join. But some have a closed panel—for instance, physicians may not join a hospital-based IPA unless they are affiliated with the hospital. 
Compensation 
In an IPA model HMO, compensation is normally by fee-for-service or capitation; most commonly plans use capitation for PCPs and discounted FFS or the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS) for specialists. HMO members make copayments to physicians for office visits, but they account for only a small portion of physician compensation. 
An IPA may use techniques such as withholds to share financial risk with member physicians and give them financial incentives to manage utilization. As you recall from Module 4, a withhold is a percentage of provider compensation that is retained by a health plan during a year. If care costs are higher than expected, this money is used to cover them; if they are not and funds remain, the money is distributed to providers at the end of the year. An IPA may also establish compensation systems that depend on quality and preventive care measures. 
Advantages and Disadvantages 
The open-panel IPA model appeals to HMOs and their members because members can usually choose from a large number of physicians practicing in their own offices throughout the HMO’s service area. This has given this model a competitive edge over staff model and group model HMOs. 
In addition, the IPA model is in some ways cost-effective. Since physicians have their own offices, the HMO does not have the expenses of facilities. And compensation by capitation and withholds gives physicians incentives to manage utilization and costs. But on the other hand, because there are many independent physician offices an IPA model HMO cannot realize the economies of scale of staff and group model HMOs, and it can be difficult to achieve consistency in care management and quality management. 
Many physicians appreciate that the IPA model HMO allows them to see members of other health plans and contract with multiple plans, giving them access to large numbers of patients and a variety of income sources. 
Direct Contract Model 
A less common variation of the IPA model is the direct contract model HMO (or direct model HMO). In this model the HMO contracts directly with individual physicians; there is no IPA or other legal entity that represents and negotiates contracts for groups of physicians. The HMO has full responsibility for functions that an IPA might participate in—the HMO must recruit physicians and handle care management and quality management. 
A direct contract model HMO usually includes PCPs and a wide range of specialists. It has an open panel and nonexclusive contracts (physicians may see other patients and contract with other health plans). It typically compensates PCPs through capitation and specialists through discounted FFS. Staff Model 
In a staff model HMO, the physicians who care for members are employees of the 
HMO, and usually the facilities in which they work are owned and operated by the HMO. Generally, a staff model HMO employs all the PCPs and specialists required to meet members’ needs, but some plans contract with some outside specialists, who provide services to members referred to them by the plan’s PCPs. The HMO also owns or contracts with hospitals, pharmacies, and other entities to provide non-physician healthcare services. 
A staff model HMO has a closed panel, since (with the possible exception of a few specialists, as mentioned above) a physician cannot provide services to the HMO unless she is an employee of it. Also, because physicians are employees, they may see only HMO members and may not contract with other health plans. 
In a staff model HMO, most physicians practice in centers owned and operated by the HMO, called ambulatory care facilities (ACFs). An ACF provides outpatient care— medical treatment that does not require an overnight stay. In a single facility members can access a wide range of physician services, including preventive care, acute care, and outpatient surgery, and there are also non-physician providers, nurses, laboratory and other diagnostic services and technicians, and professional support staff. In this way ACFs offer members “one-stop shopping” for healthcare. A staff model HMO may have several ACFs in its service area.  
Compensation 
Compensation in a staff model HMO is generally simple and straightforward—physicians are employees and are paid a salary. This means that all risk is borne by the HMO, not the physicians. If many or few services are provided, the physician still receives her salary, and if utilization of services is greater than expected, the HMO bears the cost. 
Advantages and Disadvantages 
The staff model offers several advantages. Care is centralized in ACFs, making possible economies of scale and facilitating the coordination of patients’ care, the management and monitoring of utilization and quality standards, and the evaluation of physician performance. And many consumers like being able to access a wide range of medical services in one place. 
On the other hand, a staff model HMO is usually more time-consuming and expensive to establish because of the capital costs of building facilities, and it is also costly to maintain because of the large fixed expense of physician salaries and building maintenance. Adding medical services or expanding geographically is also capital intensive, thus limiting a staff model HMO’s competitive ability in a changing market. For consumers, a staff model HMO offers a relatively narrow choice of providers, and to address this, many staff model HMOs have added an IPA delivery system or a point-ofservice option (discussed in the next module). 
Group Model 
In a group model HMO (also called the group practice model), the HMO contracts with a multi-specialty group practice of physicians. This group practice may be formed as a corporation, partnership, professional association, or other legal entity. The physicians in the group practice are employees of the group practice, and they may also have an ownership interest in it. They generally share office space, support staff, medical records, and medical equipment at a common medical center or clinic. While a multispecialty group practice includes PCPs and a variety of specialists, it may not have specialists in every area, in which case it may subcontract with outside specialists to provide some services to HMO members. 
A group model HMO may be either captive or independent. 
• In a captive group model HMO, the group practice serves only (or primarily) the HMO’s members and may not contract with other health plans. The panel is closed—a physician cannot join the HMO’s network without being a member of the group practice. Typically the HMO performs management and administrative functions for the group practice, and it may also own the facilities or equipment used by it. 
• In an independent group model HMO, the group practice provides services both to the HMO’s members and to other patients, and it may contract with other health plans. The HMO has an open panel—a physician can join without belonging to the group practice. 
Compensation 
A group model HMO usually compensates the group practice by capitation, and the group practice compensates its physicians (including any subcontracted specialists). 
Physician compensation is by salaries and incentive payments, based on a physician’s performance, area of expertise, and administrative work. Physician compensation often includes incentives for care management. In this arrangement, the group practice bears the risk, and to the extent physicians have an ownership in the practice they share in profits and losses.  
Advantages and Disadvantages 
Unlike a staff model HMO, a group model HMOs does not have to pay for facilities, since these are most often owned and maintained by the group practice. And it does not have the fixed expense of physician salaries, since it pays the group by capitation. On the other hand, a group model HMO may be limited by the location of the group practice, and in the case of a captive group with its closed panel, members’ access to and choice of physicians may be limited. Also, a group model HMO has less control of care management and quality of care than a staff model HMO. 
Network Model 
A network model HMO is like a group model HMO, except that the HMO contracts with more than one group practice. This allows the HMO to provide a wide range of physician services in a geographic area.  
A network model HMOs may have either an open or closed panel. For instance, suppose an HMO contracts with six or seven group practices. It might not allow physicians not belonging to these groups to join (closed panel), or it might accept into its network any physicians who meet certain criteria. Group practices can usually see nonHMO patients and contract with other health plans. 
Compensation 
As in the group model, in the network model the HMO compensates the group practice, and the group practice compensates its physicians. Network model HMOs are increasingly moving toward a mix of capitation and discounted fee-for-service in compensating group practices. To the extent a group is compensated by capitation, it bears risk.  
Advantages and Disadvantages 
An advantage of network model HMOs, particularly open-panel plans, is that members have access to a broader range of physician services and locations than under the staff and group models. As with the group model, there are no facility costs and no fixed salary expense, but there is limited control of care management and quality of care. 

7 	PPOs and Other Health Plan Types 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• define a preferred provider organization (PPO) and describe its main features, and 
• define and describe an exclusive provider organization (EPO), a point-of-service (POS) product, and a managed indemnity plan. 
In the last two modules we studied HMOs, and now we will look at some other health plan designs—preferred provider organizations (PPOs), exclusive provider organizations (EPOs), point-of-service (POS) products, and managed indemnity plans. These plan types are not as tightly managed as traditional HMOs, but they also differ from traditional indemnity insurance in that they employ healthcare management concepts and techniques. They fall in the middle of the managed care continuum discussed earlier. 
We will learn the main features that characterize each of these plan types and distinguish it from others. But it should be kept in mind that distinctions between types are not always clear-cut. In an effort to be responsive to consumer and purchaser needs and preferences and to remain competitive, health plans develop designs that in a variety of ways balance managing costs with giving members a choice of healthcare providers. As a result, a product of a certain type may take on the features characteristic of other types, blurring the difference between them. 
Preferred Provider Organizations (PPOs)  
What Is a PPO? 
A preferred provider organization (PPO) is a healthcare benefits arrangement with these main characteristics: 
• The health plan contracts with healthcare providers to deliver services to its members, and these providers agree to discounted compensation. That is, contracted providers charge the PPO less than their normal fees for services. Why are they willing to do this? Affiliation with a PPO generally brings a high volume of patients, so although a physician or hospital may receive less per service, more services are performed and billed. 
• Like an HMO, a PPO has a network, made up of its contracted providers. But unlike a traditional HMO, a PPO does not cover only care received from network providers—members can go to outside of the network and still receive benefits. However, members have strong incentives to use preferred (network) providers. The benefit package for network care is typically “richer” than for non-network care—that is, more procedures and services are covered. Also, members pay more in cost-sharing when they go out of network—copayments or coinsurance is typically higher. And there may be a limit on a member’s out-of-pocket costs for network care but no such limit for non-network care.  
• Unlike traditional HMOs, most PPOs allow members to see a specialist without a referral from their primary care physician (PCP), adding to the flexibility of the PPO model. 
• The contracted providers agree to comply with certain utilization review, care management, and quality management requirements. 
Thus PPO members have the freedom to choose any provider, as in indemnity insurance, but other features (such as incentives to stay in the network, utilization review, and quality management) promote cost-effective, high-quality care. Consumers like this combination, and a majority of employees with health coverage are in PPOs (58 percent in 2010).1 There are over 500 PPOs in the United States. (This number has been declining somewhat, but this is a result of consolidation, not decreasing enrollment.2) 
PPO Structure and Organization 
As mentioned, a PPO involves a contract arrangement between healthcare providers (physicians, hospitals, and others) and purchasers, such as insurance companies and employers. One of the primary functions of a PPO is to negotiate contracts between providers and purchasers. 
A PPO can be sponsored by a group of physicians and/or hospitals, a Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan, a third-party administrator (TPA), or an employer. But more than half are owned by insurance companies. Some of the largest insurers have developed their own PPO networks, while others lease provider networks or form cooperative ventures with independent PPOs. 
PPOs take many different forms, with a wide variety of structures. Two key ways in which they differ are risk and centralization. 
• As we explained earlier in the course, a healthcare organization assumes risk if it is exposed to possible financial losses by having to spend more to provide healthcare than it is paid for providing that care. Some PPOs are risk-bearing entities, but most are not. In many cases, the risk is assumed by self-insured employers or other organizations.  
• A PPO can be a decentralized network of preferred providers, established and maintained by the entity that insures the members, or even just leased by it. At the other end of the spectrum, a PPO can be a highly centralized organization, with not only its own network but an administrative structure that pays claims and performs other functions. Such a PPO may also assume risk. 
Like other health plans, PPOs provide comprehensive healthcare benefits. In addition to standard medical care they typically cover many types of specialty care. Nearly all cover behavioral healthcare, and a large majority include pharmacy benefits. A PPO network may include primary care providers, specialists, hospitals, diagnostic facilities, and other healthcare providers.  
Provider Compensation 
For physicians contracted with PPOs, the most common method of compensation is discounted fees—the PPO pays the physician a fee for the service she provides, but the amount is reduced from her normal charge. Fee amounts are commonly based on a fee schedule (also referred to as fee caps)—the physician receives her billed fee up to an amount set by a schedule. In 2008 over 80 percent of PPOs used a fee schedule (fee caps) and over 30 percent paid doctors based on a discount off the billed charge; less than 5 percent used capitation. (Some plans use more than one method.)3 
For hospitals PPOs use several payment methods, including per-diem payments (a set amount for each day a member is hospitalized), used by 85 percent of PPOs in 2008; discounted charges, used by 77 percent; and rates based on classes of medical conditions called diagnosis-related groups (DRGs), used by 55 percent.4 
Historically, most PPO were structured so that providers did not assume any risk for providing care, and many of the compensation methods mentioned above (such as discounted fees and charges) do not entail provider risk. But others, such as per-diem payments, DRG-based rates, and capitation, do. Some PPOs have included such risksharing arrangements in their provider contracts to promote more cost-effective care and greater provider involvement in managing utilization. 
Utilization Management, Care Management, and Quality Management 
A PPO generally requires contracted providers to follow utilization and care management procedures to achieve cost-effective, appropriate care. PPOs have adopted many utilization and care management techniques once common only to HMOs. Some PPOs, especially those owned by HMOs or insurance companies, have inhouse utilization review staffs; others contract this to outside firms or delegate it to providers.  
PPOs also employ many quality management techniques typical of HMOs. Nearly all 
PPOs routinely credential and recredential contracted physicians, and increasingly PPOs are obtaining accreditation for their quality management programs from well known independent third-party organizations such as URAC. Other Types of Health Plans  
After PPOs became popular, health plans further refined and customized products to meet the needs and preferences of consumers and purchasers, and new plan designs were introduced.  
Specialty PPOs  
Specialty PPOs are structured and operate like regular PPOs, but they provide specialty healthcare services such as dental care, behavioral healthcare, prescription drugs, vision care, physical therapy, laboratory services, chiropractics, and podiatry. (Specialty health plans are discussed in the next module.) 
Exclusive Provider Organizations (EPOs)  
An exclusive provider organization (EPO) is structured and operates like a PPO, but it is like a traditional HMO in one important way—out-of-network care is generally not covered. If a member receives services from a provider not in an EPO’s network, she receives no benefits and must pay out for the services of her own pocket. 
Many PPOs developed EPOs to help them compete directly with HMOs. In most states EPOs are regulated as insurance companies under state insurance laws and are not subject to state and federal HMO legislation. But some states either prohibit EPOs or regulate them as HMOs. 
Point-of-Service (POS) Products 
A point-of-service (POS) product is a hybrid that combines features of PPOs, HMOs, and indemnity insurance. POS products are called by several names, and there are a number of variations, so defining this design and distinguishing among types can be complicated. The basic characteristics of a POS product are these:  
• When members need healthcare, they choose at that time (at the point of service) whether to go to a network provider or one not in the network. Members going out-of-network normally pay higher cost-sharing, giving them an incentive to remain in network. In this way, POS plans are more flexible than traditional HMOs and similar to PPOs. 
• POS plans are like HMOs in that they usually require members to select a primary care physician (PCP), who delivers routine care and serves as a gatekeeper, giving referrals to specialists.  
• POS plans also resemble HMOs in their strong emphasis on preventive care and wellness (including such services as vaccinations and smoking cessation programs). 
POS products are offered by network-based health plans and by insurers. Often an 
HMO offers a POS option to its members; in this case, the HMO generally compensates PCPs by means of capitation, and it may also withhold compensation pending PCPs meeting utilization or cost-saving goals. The HMO reimburses non-network providers on a fee-for-service basis. 
As mentioned, under a POS product members receiving out-of-network care pay more, typically higher cost-sharing. In some designs, the member must pay the difference between what the POS plan pays network providers for a service and what a nonnetwork provider charges. HMO members with a POS option pay relatively small copayments for network care and 20 or 30 percent coinsurance for out-of-network care, and there is also generally a cap on non-network benefits. However, some plans provide greater benefits for non-network care if the member has obtained a referral for his PCP to see a non-network specialist. 
Some employers like POS products because they are a compromise between less restrictive designs like indemnity and PPOs and more tightly managed HMOs. In the past POS products had a major drawback—higher administrative costs, resulting from the need to administer benefits for both network and non-network providers. But this is less of a problem today because of the increased use of technology and enhanced managerial expertise. A significant percentage of employees are covered by POS products (8 percent in 2010), but the number has declined over the last decade (from an estimated 24 percent in 1999).5 
Managed Indemnity Plans 
Some indemnity health insurance plans have adopted certain managed care techniques and so are called managed indemnity plans. These plans are typically organized and administered like traditional indemnity insurance; there is no provider network, insureds use any provider they choose, and provider payment is by fee-for-service. But certain health plan cost-control measures, such as precertification and utilization review, are used.  
The Road to Consumer Choice 
PPOs, POS products, and similar designs addressed the demand for greater flexibility in health plan products, but they still insulated consumers from the cost of care. The next step in the health plan industry's evolution was the consumer-directed health plan (CDHP), in which the consumer is directly involved in the cost of care. CDHPs and the rise of consumer choice will be discussed in Modules 9 and 10. 
Notes  
                                                 
1  Kaiser Family Foundation, Health Research and Education Trust (HRET). 2010. Employer Health Benefits 2010 Annual Survey, Summary of Findings. 2
  Sanofi-Aventis U.S., LLC. 2009. HMO-PPO Digest 2009 (Sanofi-Aventis Managed Care Digest Series), pp. 24-27. 3  Ibid., page 28. 4  Ibid. 
5 Kaiser Family Foundation, Health Research and Education Trust (HRET). 2010. Employer Health Benefits 2010 Annual Survey, Summary of Findings. 

8 	Health Plans for Specialty Services 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• explain how a health plan might carve out the delivery of specialty services,  distinguish between the three main types of dental plans, 
• describe the four basic strategies that managed behavioral health organizations (MBHOs) use to manage the delivery of behavioral healthcare services, and   list some of the services offered by a pharmacy benefit management (PBM) plan. 
In the past managed care plans focused on basic medical care—physician and hospital services. But today consumers want other health services, such as dental care, vision care, behavioral (mental) healthcare, and prescription drugs, to be included in their health plans, and employers have responded by offering benefits for these specialty services. 
Specialty services are healthcare services that are generally considered outside standard medical-surgical services because of the specialized knowledge required for service delivery and management. Specialty services often involve different types of providers and delivery systems than standard medical services. Specialty services may include: 
dental care vision care behavioral healthcare prescription drugs chiropractics 
other forms of complementary and alternative medicine such as acupuncture and naturopathy rehabilitation services chronic disease care home healthcare cardiac surgery oncology services 
certain diagnostic services, such as radiology and magnetic resonance imaging 
Managed care approaches for many specialty services are still in a developmental stage. For others, health plans have found that the application of focused management techniques can yield cost savings and promote quality care. Employers and health plans have two options for arranging and managing the delivery of specialty services: 
• They can develop and maintain their own programs.  
• They can carve out the delivery and management of these services.  
The term carve-out carries several different meanings in the healthcare industry. In a general sense, a carve-out refers to the separation of a medical service (or a group of services) from the basic set of benefits in some way. The separation may be either through a different compensation method for providers or through the use of a separate network or delivery system. For example, a health plan might carve out its HIV/AIDS disease management services from its other medical services by contracting with an external company to develop and manage the program. The health plan, however, still retains accountability for the HIV/AIDS services. This type of carve-out is the one that is relevant to our discussion of specialty services. 
In this module we will discuss the use of carve-outs as a means of delivering specialty services. We will then provide a more detailed discussion of three specialty services that are frequently carved out of the basic set of benefits: dental care, behavioral healthcare, and prescription drug benefits. 
Carve-Outs 
Carve-Outs Emerge 
As costs in all areas of healthcare increased in the late 1970s and early 1980s, some health plans began exploring ways of applying managed care techniques to specialty services. These pioneering organizations found that within certain specialties, the application of focused management techniques seemed to yield cost savings. 
Independent organizations, whose primary purpose was to deliver a particular specialty service, also began to apply managed care techniques to manage those services. In some instances these independent organizations were able to deliver specialty services more affordably and more effectively than health plans. As a result, many health plans began to contract with these independent organizations to deliver such services. 
Health plans often carve out specialty services that have one or more of the following characteristics: 
 an easily defined benefit,  a defined patient population,  high or rising costs, and/or   inappropriate utilization.  
Comprehensive Carve-Out Arrangements  
In a comprehensive carve-out arrangement, a health plan transfers to the carve-out organization the authority to conduct all the activities necessary to deliver and manage the specialty service. Such activities may include network management, quality management, utilization review, case management, and claims administration. In a partial carve-out arrangement, the health plan retains the management of selected activities. 
Compensation for comprehensive carve-outs in mature health plan markets is typically on a capitation basis. In less mature markets, in partial carve-outs, and for services that do not have well-defined patterns of utilization, compensation is often based on fee-forservice or a fee plus a percentage of savings. 
Although many carve-out arrangements have produced favorable outcomes for members, providers, and health plans, there is some concern that healthcare may become too fragmented with numerous carve-out arrangements. Additionally, state legislation may affect the way health plans manage and deliver specialty services. For example, laws in some states mandate that HMOs arrange and manage the delivery of certain specialty services to retain their HMO licenses. Similarly, state consumer protection laws may seek to ensure that health plan members receive integrated, quality care. These concerns have prompted some HMOs and other health plans to roll previously carved-out services back into the basic bundle of services they deliver to their members. 
Specialty HMOs 
Some states provide for the formation of specialty health maintenance organizations for specialty services. A specialty health maintenance organization (specialty HMO) is an organization that uses an HMO model to provide healthcare services to a subset or single specialty of medical care. Typical specialty HMOs include dental HMOs, vision HMOs, and behavioral health HMOs. Although they are based on an HMO model, specialty HMOs may differ greatly in structure and operations from basic medical HMOs. In states which specify a broad range of services that must be provided by a licensed HMO, specialty HMOs are not an option. In those states, managed specialty service organizations do exist, but not in the legal form of a specialty HMO.  
Dental Care 
The term managed dental care was once synonymous with dental HMOs, and later it was used to refer to other network-based plans as well. Today virtually any plan that includes some level of oversight of provider fees, utilization, quality of care, and other such matters could be considered managed dental care.1  
Managed dental care has grown, as more employers have sponsored dental benefits and as those benefits have been increasingly provided by health plans. A large majority (93 percent in 2008) of very large employers (500 or more employees) offer dental coverage,2 and a majority (56.6 percent in 2007) of Americans have dental coverage.3 
And a large and growing majority of this coverage is managed care (see table). 
Dental Plan Enrollees by Plan Type4 
Plan Type 
2001 
2008 
Percentage Change  2008 vs. 2001* 
Indemnity 
38% 
14% 
-63% 
PPO 
39% 
66% 
69% 
HMO 
15% 
8% 
-47% 
 
One reason for the growth in managed dental care is an increased willingness of dentists to affiliate with health plans. The costs of maintaining a dental practice have risen steadily, and an oversupply of dentists in some areas has made it difficult for dentists to acquire or retain market share, making participation in health plans attractive. Another cause of this growth is that managed plans are generally less costly to purchasers than traditional indemnity plans.  
The three main types of managed dental plans are dental health maintenance organizations (DHMOs), dental preferred provider organizations (dental PPOs), and dental point-of-service (dental POS) options.  
Dental Health Maintenance Organizations 
A dental health maintenance organization (DHMO) (also known as a capitated plan) has the following characteristics: 
• Members must see a network dentist, except for emergencies and in some cases specialty services when network specialists are unavailable.  
• Dentists are usually paid on a capitation basis, meaning that they assume the majority of financial risk for providing all necessary services in exchange for a guaranteed cash flow.  
• Members pay a small portion of costs by making copayments based on a schedule. There are usually no annual deductibles, coinsurance, or yearly maximums. Copayments are not charged for diagnostic and preventive services, which are fully covered by the dentist’s capitation payment. 
DHMOs almost always have the smallest network, lowest cost, least amount of choice, and greatest restrictions when compared to the other types of dental plans.  
Many dentists are reluctant to join DHMOs because of the low reimbursement and financial risk. Plan administrators have taken measures to enlarge DHMO networks by providing supplemental payments to dentists for certain procedures, guaranteeing them a minimum income per member, or reducing their financial risk or increasing their compensation in other ways.  
As the table above shows, DHMOs make up a small portion of the market, and this share has been declining. In fact, for many years industry experts have been predicting their demise. But this has not happened, because DHMOs serve a need. They have a small but loyal following among individuals who are dentally needy and/or very pricesensitive and willing to trade freedom of choice and a large network for low cost. 
Dental Preferred Provider Organizations 
A dental preferred provider organization (dental PPO) has the following attributes: 
• Members can see the dentist of their choice—they do have to use a network dentist. However, they generally pay less if they stay in network. It is common for a PPO to have a lower deductible, lower coinsurance, and a higher annual maximum for in-network care. Or a plan may require a member who visits an outof-network dentist to pay the difference between that dentist’s fees and an innetwork dentist’s discounted fees.  
• Dentist reimbursement is commonly based on a fee schedule (discounted feefor-service). Affiliated dentists also agree to other requirements and administrative oversight provisions, such as maintaining an active license to practice, having a minimum level of liability insurance, and cooperating with audits, quality assessment, utilization management, dispute resolution, and others. 
• Members pay an annual deductible and coinsurance. The deductible is generally $25 to $75 for an individual and $75 to $150 for a family. The coinsurance percentage members pay is typically 20 percent for basic services such as fillings and 50 percent for major services such as crowns. There is no deductible or coinsurance for diagnostic and preventive services. There is usually also an annual maximum benefit, generally $1,000 to $2,500. 
Point-of-Service (POS) Option 
Definitions of a point-of-service (POS) option vary. For our purposes, we define a POS program as any that involves a combination of networks, where members can choose any dentist (including out-of-network) and the benefit level and provider reimbursement vary accordingly. The most distinguishing feature of POS plans is that members do not have to choose any particular dentist or network during annual open enrollment—they are free to switch at will, depending on their needs and preferences, with the benefit available being determined at the point of service. Usually a member who goes out of network incurs higher out-of-pocket costs. The most common POS program in dental benefits involves combinations of PPOs and DHMOs. Behavioral Healthcare 
The treatment of mental disorders and substance abuse is known as behavioral healthcare. Such problems are widespread in the U.S. population—in a given year about one quarter of adults are diagnosable for one or more disorder, and about 6 percent suffer from a seriously debilitating mental illness. And the incidence among young people is even higher—nearly half of teenagers have had some sort of mental disorder or substance abuse problem during their lives, and about one in five have had a serious mental illness. Because of the high frequency of these conditions, their treatment is a major component of the healthcare system. In 2008 13.4 percent of adults in the United States received some form of behavioral healthcare.5 
Controlling Behavioral Healthcare Costs—Initial Strategies 
Decades ago behavioral healthcare represented a very small percentage of healthcare spending. But beginning in the early 1980s, the demand for services rose. This was caused by increases in people’s awareness of mental health and substance abuse problems, in the social acceptability of treatment, in the availability of behavioral health services, and perhaps also in the stress on individuals and families.  
As a result of this rising demand, behavioral healthcare costs to health plans and sponsoring employers soared. To control costs and limit their financial liability, plans sought to reduce the utilization of inappropriate or unnecessary services. But existing utilization management strategies were not designed for the complexities of behavioral healthcare and were not effective.  
So plans turned to special cost-sharing, benefit limits, and exclusions for behavioral healthcare. Some plans charged higher deductibles or coinsurance for behavioral care than for medical care. Some limited the number of outpatient visits and inpatient care days covered each year and placed annual and lifetime dollar caps on behavioral care benefits. Some excluded or limited coverage of certain illnesses (such as chronic illnesses, organic psychoses, and personality disorders); services (inpatient psychiatric services, long-term outpatient treatment, and marital counseling); and populations (geriatric patients, patients with developmental disabilities, substance abusers). Ultimately, these strategies did little to reduce costs, and in some cases they limited access to necessary and appropriate care. They also led to mental health parity legislation, which restricts a plan’s ability to impose special cost-sharing and limitations on behavioral healthcare, as discussed below.  
Second Generation Strategies 
A managed behavioral health organization (MBHO) provides behavioral healthcare services and implements health plan techniques. MBHOs emerged in the 1980s, and health plans and employers turned to them for access to care and cost management. 
MBHOs’ specialized knowledge and experience in behavioral healthcare enable them to determine which services were necessary and appropriate for particular patients and to deliver the types of services that led to better outcomes. MBHOs use four basic strategies to manage the delivery of services: alternative treatment levels, alternative treatment settings, alternative treatment methods, and crisis intervention. MBHOs have also developed mechanisms to help match these services with patients’ needs. 
Alternative Treatment Levels 
People with behavioral disorders have a wide range of care needs. There are a large number of disorders, and the severity of a particular disorder can vary dramatically among different patients and in the same patient over time. Many patients suffer multiple disorders. To meet these varied needs, MBHOs cover the following levels of care: 
• Acute care is for those who need continuous, intensive, individualized care, often in conjunction with medical care. This is the most secure and restrictive level of care. 
• Post-acute care is for those who need continuous monitoring in a safe, structured environment but not acute care.  
• Partial hospitalization is for those who need substantial care and supervision but not 24-hour monitoring. Patients in partial hospitalization programs typically spend part of the day or week in a facility and part outside working or attending school. Many programs are designed to treat substance abuse. 
• Intensive outpatient care is for those who need extensive individual or group therapy but not continuous care and supervision in a confined setting. Such patients may attend therapy sessions for several hours per day, several days per week.  
• Outpatient care is for those who need less frequent therapy (once or twice a week or once a month) and shorter sessions (typically one hour or less) compared to intensive outpatient care. Outpatient care is the least intensive and restrictive level of care. 
The level of care a patient receives typically depends on the risk to himself, others, and property; his ability to function effectively at home or in the community; and his medical needs. 
Alternative Treatment Settings  
Behavioral healthcare can be delivered effectively in a variety of settings. Acute care is typically provided in psychiatric hospitals, psychiatric units of general hospitals, or hospital observation units. These facilities are equipped to address the needs of patients who pose a significant risk to themselves or others, are unable to function without assistance or supervision, or have suffered acute episodes such as drug overdoses. Post-acute care is most often provided in subacute care facilities. Partial hospitalization programs are typically in psychiatric hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, or halfway houses. Outpatient care takes place in the offices of therapists and mental health clinics. 
Alternative Treatment Methods  
Behavioral healthcare involves a variety of approaches. These include drug therapy, psychotherapy, and counseling, sometimes in combination. Psychotherapy may be brief and goal-oriented or last a long time, and it may be administered individually or to groups. Methods used with children and adolescents often differ from those for adults. 
There is also a variety of care providers. In some cases services are provided by psychologists, psychiatric nurses, licensed clinical social workers (LCSWs), or marriage, family, and child counselors (MFCCs). In other cases care is provided by psychiatrists, who can prescribe medications as well as conduct psychotherapy and counseling. 
Crisis Intervention  
One of the key elements of behavioral healthcare is crisis intervention—the intensive treatment of acute episodes of a mental disorder. The purpose is to keep the patient safe and to stabilize his condition so that he can begin psychotherapy or other treatment. Appropriate treatment in the acute phase of a behavioral health disorder helps reduce the likelihood of recurrent acute episodes. Directing Patients to Appropriate Care  
Assessing members’ behavioral healthcare needs and providing quality services to meet those needs are important aspects of managed behavioral care. Directing members to the most appropriate services in order to manage costs and utilization is also important. In many health plans and MBHOs members can access behavioral healthcare services directly, but in others they must go through a gatekeeper or referral process. Three common approaches are primary care providers (PCPs), centralized referral systems, and employee assistance programs. 
PCPs as Gatekeepers 
In the past some plans required members to access behavioral healthcare services through a primary care provider. The PCP assessed a member's needs, gave her a referral to a behavioral healthcare specialist, and sometimes authorized payment for services. But this has become much less common. Although incorporating behavioral healthcare into primary care promotes coordination and continuity of care and supports utilization management, PCPs often lack the knowledge and experience needed to diagnose behavioral problems and determine whether services are needed and if so what kind. 
Centralized Referral Systems 
Some health plans and MBHOs have a centralized behavioral healthcare referral system. Members call and talk to a mental health/substance abuse case manager, who conducts an initial assessment and refers the member to the appropriate provider for treatment or a more detailed evaluation. Today such systems are much more common than PCP gatekeepers, as they offer quicker access to care and often a more accurate diagnosis, more effective treatment, and more efficient use of resources (although they may decrease coordination and continuity of care). 
Employee Assistance Programs 
Another way people can be directed to appropriate behavioral healthcare services is through employee assistance programs (EAPs) established by employers or MBHOs. EAPs are frequently the first point of contact for employees and family members in need of information or assistance regarding behavioral problems. EAP professionals generally encounter behavioral problems early and can direct plan members to providers and services before a problem turns into a crisis. But unlike PCPs or case managers, EAP professionals may not have the background necessary to diagnose behavioral disorders and may lack experience with managed behavioral health programs. 
Other Strategies 
MBHOs and health plans manage quality and cost in other ways as well. They develop clinical practice guidelines—recommendations for providers on the best treatment approaches (discussed in detail in a later module)—which improve patient outcomes and reduce the use of inappropriate services. In many cases they direct members to effective outpatient services instead of unnecessary and more costly inpatient care. They negotiate with providers for reduced fees and greater acceptance of practice guidelines in exchange for increased patient volume. More recently, they have focused on the development of alternative treatment options, the incorporation of community-based resources into the healthcare system, case management, and the better integration of behavioral care and primary care. 
In recent years there has been an increased focus on long-term outcomes. For instance, it has been found that in some cases higher-cost drugs result in lower overall costs because of fewer office visits and hospitalizations and greater patient acceptance and compliance. Another example: In some cases (especially in substance abuse) increasing coverage for follow-up treatment can reduce relapses, resulting in lower long-term costs. 
Mental Health Parity 
An important issue in behavioral healthcare is mental health parity—equivalent coverage of behavioral healthcare and medical care. As we have seen, to limit their liability in the face of rapidly rising costs, some health plans provided more limited benefits for behavioral care than for medical care, and many mental health advocates contended that this was unfair. In response, Congress enacted the Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 (MHPA) and the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA).  
Neither MHPA nor MHPAEA requires health plans to cover behavioral healthcare, but if a group plan with more than 50 members does cover it, the plan must comply with certain parity rules. MHPA requires that lifetime and annual dollar caps on benefits for behavioral care not be lower than for medical care. MHPAEA continues this requirement and adds the following:6 
• Cost-sharing and out-of-pocket limits for behavioral care cannot be greater than for medical care. 
• Limitations on behavioral coverage (such as on the number of visits or the frequency or duration of treatment) can be no more restrictive than for medical care. Nonquantitative limitations, such as medical management and preauthorization, also cannot be more restrictive. 
• If a health plan pays benefits for out-of-network medical care it must do so for behavioral care as well. 
• MHPAEA extends these rules (including those of MHPA on lifetime and annual caps) to substance abuse treatment (which was not covered by MHPA). 
It should be emphasized that MHPA and MHPAEA do not require a health plan to provide behavioral healthcare benefits, but if a plan does so it must comply with the above rules. Both laws do not apply to individual policies or group plans with 50 or fewer members. They do apply both to insurers and to employers with self-insured (selffunded) plans (with some exemptions). Finally, it should be noted that some states have mental health parity laws that go beyond this federal legislation. 
Pharmacy Benefit Plans 
Prescription drugs account for a substantial portion of all U.S. healthcare spending—in 
2009 more than 3.6 billion prescriptions were filled, at a cost of over $200 billion, more 

than 10 percent of all healthcare expenditures.7 And drug costs have generally risen at an even faster rate than overall medical costs. This has prompted employers and health plans to focus on managing the cost and utilization of pharmaceuticals. 8 
But drugs also play a role in the quality of healthcare. For example, a significant portion of hospital admissions of people 65 and older result from the inappropriate use of prescription drugs, and this often occurs because several healthcare providers are treating the same patient and prescribing drugs for her without knowledge of her other prescriptions, leading to harmful drug interactions. This problem can be addressed by tracking and coordinating members’ drug use. 
The Pharmacy Benefit Management (PBM) Plan 
In response to rising costs and quality of care issues, pharmacy benefit management plans emerged. A pharmacy benefit management (PBM) plan (also know as a prescription benefit management plan) is a specialty health plan designed to contain the costs of prescription drugs while promoting more efficient and safer use of them. The great majority of health plans contract with PBMs. PBMs use various managed care cost-control techniques, and they promote quality in a number of ways. For instance, a PBM may screen for drug interactions, using integrated data systems that provide a link among the provider, the health plan, and the pharmacy network. A PBM may promote quality in prescribing among providers through feedback and reporting. 
Clinical Services Offered by PBMs 
Pharmacy benefit management plans typically interact with physicians and pharmacists in performing four types of clinical services: physician profiling, drug utilization review, formulary management, and prior authorization. These services are not unique to PBMs; they may also be performed by health plans, hospitals, retail pharmacies, or other specialty organizations. 
Physician Profiling  
Physician profiling consists of compiling data on physicians’ prescribing patterns and comparing the actual prescribing patterns of individual doctors for select drug categories to those of most doctors. Peer comparison is typically based on medical specialty and region. The PBM then seeks to educate doctors whose patterns differ from the norm, reviewing with them the appropriateness and cost of their prescribing patterns through mailings, telephone calls, and face-to-face visits. 
Drug Utilization Review  
Drug utilization review (DUR) is a program that evaluates whether drugs are being used safely, effectively, and appropriately. DUR is an important component of quality management programs because it promotes patient safety by identifying potential and actual problems related to the ordering, dispensing, administration, and use of drugs. Drug utilization review programs identify problems with:  
 	inappropriate dosage,  overuse identified from early refills,  underuse identified through late refills,  the length of time a medication is taken,  duplication,  side effects, and drug interactions. 
PBMs monitor an individual patient’s drug problems through prospective (before drug therapy), concurrent (during drug therapy), or retrospective (after dispensing or postdrug therapy) review. Patient-specific DUR is typically used to identify the following potential problems: 
drug-disease conflicts,  drug-drug interactions,  chronic overutilization,  underutilization (noncompliance),  drug-sex and drug-age conflicts, and drug-pregnancy contraindications.  
Computerized systems at the point of dispensing play an important role in reducing the incidence of these problems. Following up with physician and patient education programs is an integral component of DUR. 
Formulary Management 
A formulary is a listing of drugs, classified by therapeutic category or disease class, that are considered preferred therapy for a given managed population and that are to be used by a health plan's providers in prescribing medications. The formulary is usually developed by an independent panel comprised of physicians, pharmacists, and other clinical experts. 
Formularies can be either closed or open. In a closed formulary only those drugs on the preferred list are covered by the health plan. In an open formulary drugs not on the preferred list are covered, but the plan member usually pays more in cost-sharing for them (as discussed below). Open formularies are more common today.  
Copayment amounts are often based in part on formularies. Two common approaches are two-tier and three-tier copayment structures. A two-tier structure requires that a member pay one copayment amount for a generic drug and a higher copayment amount for a brand-name drug. A three-tier structure requires a member to pay one copayment amount for a generic drug, a higher amount for a brand-name drug included on the health plan’s formulary, and an even higher amount for a nonformulary drug. 
Formularies are often a key program that a PBM or health plan uses to negotiate for rebates from drug manufacturers. A rebate is a reduction in the price of a particular pharmaceutical obtained from the manufacturer. Most PBMs enter into discount rebate agreements with pharmaceutical manufacturers, under which the PBM receives a rebate on the price of a drug and in exchange the manufacturer has fewer restrictions on getting its drug into the PBM’s formulary than companies without such an agreement. 
However, the PBM’s formulary panel must be careful to ensure the quality of the pharmaceuticals that it endorses by including in the formulary the safest, most medically effective, and cost-effective drugs. 
Most PBMs use their formulary to perform generic and therapeutic substitution. Generic substitution is the dispensing of a generic equivalent; therapeutic substitution is the dispensing of a different chemical entity within the same drug class. Generic substitution can be performed without physician approval in most cases, but therapeutic substitution always requires physician approval. Many PBMs use benefit design (such as copayment differentials) to encourage both therapeutic and generic substitution. 
Prior Authorization  
Prior authorization, sometimes known as a medical necessity review, is a program that requires physicians to obtain certification of medical necessity before prescribing a drug. Many PBMs have established protocols for physicians to receive prior authorization over the telephone, using a semi-automated system. In some of these programs, the physician is prompted through a series of interactive menus requesting clinical and patient information. At the end of the telephone menus, the physician is either given a prior authorization number or connected to a pharmacist, who asks further questions. 
Other Services Offered by PBMs  
PBMs also offer a number of services to members, providers, and health plans that can control costs and improve convenience. 
Mail-Order Pharmacies 
In a mail-order pharmacy program drugs are ordered and delivered through the mail to members at a reduced cost. Some PBMs operate their own mail-order pharmacy services, while others contract with outside vendors. PBMs that operate their own program generally negotiate a high-volume purchase contract with each drug manufacturer and pass the cost savings on to their clients. PBMs that contract this operation out usually negotiate a discounted rate with the vendor based on the size of the pharmacy network. This discounted rate is applied to all drugs that are covered under the PBM’s mail-order contract with the vendor.  
Card Services  
PBMs may also use pharmaceutical card services to facilitate the processing and tracking of pharmaceutical claims. Pharmaceutical cards, also known as drug cards or prescription cards, are identification cards issued by the PBM to plan members. A member must present her card to a participating pharmacist to receive PBM benefits. The card identifies the plan a person belongs to and other information the pharmacist needs, such as the copayment amount. Some PBMs do not issue separate pharmaceutical cards but use the health plan member identification card as a pharmaceutical card.  
A pharmaceutical card program allows a PBM to process a claim electronically when a prescription is filled by a pharmacist. It also enables the PBM to transmit information to the pharmacist about ingredient duplicates, therapeutic duplicates, severe drug interactions, early refills, age precautions, benefit restrictions, etc.  
PBM Contractual Arrangements 
PBMs typically operate under one of three contractual arrangements: fee-for-service, risk sharing, and capitation. 
Fee-for-Service 
Under fee-for-service arrangements, the PBM creates a retail pharmacy network that offers discounts on prescription drugs and can perform online claims processing. For each prescription filled for members of a health plan, the plan pays the PBM a claims administration fee. However, the health plan generally saves money compared to unmanaged drug benefits. 
Risk Sharing 
A risk-sharing contract may be used when an employer contracts with a PBM to manage pharmacy benefits. The PBM and the employer agree on a target cost per employee per month. If the actual cost per employee per month is greater than the target, the PBM pays part of the cost overrun, and if the actual cost is less than the target, the PBM shares in the savings.  
The PBM bases the target cost per employee per month on a combination of factors: price discounts (a percent reduction in the average wholesale price), rebates for formulary products, and savings from clinical services. The target cost per employee per month may be disease-specific or related to therapeutic drug class. 
Capitation 
Under a capitation contract, a PBM agrees to provide all pharmaceutical services in exchange for a fixed dollar amount per employee per month. Capitation contracts are increasing in popularity, but not quickly. One reason for this slow growth may be that PBMs have not yet determined how to accurately project or account for future pharmaceutical expenditures. Also, many employers are hesitant to put in place strong utilization control measures (such as prior authorization and closed formularies), particularly when they may affect a negotiated benefit of a trade union.  
Notes 
                                                 
1
  Some content in this section is adapted from the dental module of AHIP’s FHIAS course, written by Cathye Lynne Smithwick RDH MA, Consultant to the Health Care Industry. 2  Mercer National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans. 2008 Survey Report. 3  National Association of Dental Plans (NADP) and Delta Dental Plans Association (DDPA). 
August 2007. ?Dental Benefits Joint Report: Enrollment.?  4  National Association of Dental Plans (NADP) and Delta Dental Plans Association (DDPA). 2009. 
?Dental Benefits Joint Report: Enrollment.?  5  National Institute of Mental Health. 2010. www.nihm.nih.gov/statistics.  
                                                                                                                                                 
6
  Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). 2010. ?Fact Sheet: The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA)? www.cms.gov  7  The Kaiser Family Foundation. www.StateHealthFacts.org. 8  Some content in this section is adapted from Drug Benefit Trends (1995, 7(2): 6–10), ©1997, SCP Communications, Inc., and subsequently on Medscape, http://www.medscape.com (10 March 1997). Used with permission. 

9 	The Move to Consumer Choice 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 identify the factors that have driven the recent movement toward consumer choice,   discuss the general philosophy of the consumer choice approach,   describe the CDHP models, and   discuss the benefits of CDHPs. 
In recent years employers and health plans have led an effort to empower consumers to play a greater role in their healthcare decisions and assume a greater responsibility for the cost of care. This module provides an overview of this move to consumer choice. We will examine the factors that gave rise to this trend and the consumer choice philosophy. We will describe the evolution of consumer-directed health plans (CDHPs) from early efforts to the more recent and more successful models, particularly health savings accounts (HSAs). And we will conclude by reviewing the benefits of CDHPs, as shown in recent studies.  
Factors Driving the Rise of Consumer Choice 
For the better part of the 1990s, healthcare spending rose more slowly than in the 1980s. Industry observers generally attributed this to the success health plans had with network-based healthcare. But in the late 1990s spending again began to increase, peaking around 2002 (see Figure 9.1)1  
Figure 9.1 
 
The new surge in healthcare costs directly affected health plan premiums. During the height of the recent cost upswing, premiums were increasing by more than 13 percent annually, according to an analysis conducted for AHIP.2 This analysis determined that increased utilization was the largest factor contributing to the premium rise, accounting for 43 percent (see Figure 9.2). In response, employer payors began seeking ways to control spiraling utilization rates and provide lower-cost health coverage options. 
 
 	Figure 9.2 	Factors Contributing to Premium Increases3 

The jump in healthcare costs in the late 1990s coincided with a shift toward less restrictive forms of managed care. Enrollment in network-based health plans had grown substantially during the 1990s (see Figure 9.3)4, and by 1996 they accounted for nearly three of four covered lives, compared with a mere one in four just eight years earlier.5 As these network plans came to dominate the market, consumers began to bristle at practices they believed limited their choice of and access to providers. In response, employers began offering less restrictive types of plans (such as preferred provider organizations (PPOs), point-of-service (POS) plans, and open-access arrangements), and policymakers in many states passed "anti-managed-care" measures aimed at increasing choice and access. 
The marketplace responded by dropping prior authorization requirements and offering a wider selection of PPO, POS, open-access, and tiered-copayment products. These plans offered consumers more choice but also more responsibility, further advancing the concept of consumer-directed healthcare. 
Figure 9.3 
 
The Role of the Internet  
Internet technology and widespread consumer access to it have also facilitated the rise of consumer-directed healthcare. Over the past decade health plan websites have evolved from static sources of basic plan information to elaborate, interactive portals. Many of these sites now allow consumers to make their own purchasing decisions, learn more about various treatment options, and better manage their healthcare needs by accessing disease management and self-care information. 
For example, United Healthcare's consumer-oriented website (myuhc, see Figure 9.4) provides secure, password-protected access to personalized benefit and claims information, data related to provider quality and cost, and even a hospital comparison tool that allows users to assess and select the best facility for a specific procedure. Having access to these powerful, interactive decision-making tools helps empower consumers to make informed decisions about the cost and quality of the healthcare they purchase. 
Figure 9.4 
 
The Consumer Choice Philosophy 
The movement toward consumer choice may represent one of the greatest paradigm shifts in the healthcare market since the rise of managed care. At its core consumer choice involves empowering healthcare consumers to play a greater role in the purchase of their healthcare services, while simultaneously giving them greater responsibility for the cost of that care. It represents a fundamental shift away from the traditional thirdparty payment approach, which for years has left the consumer with little awareness of or concern about the cost of the services he or she uses. 
The expectation is that if consumers have increased decision-making power and financial responsibility they will become more judicious in the way they purchase healthcare services as well as in the type and amount of services they use. By having more "skin in the game," consumers have a greater incentive to get the best product, service, and value for their money. 
Consumer-Directed Health Plans 
Under the consumer choice paradigm, employers choose an insurance carrier or thirdparty administrator to manage benefits and the network and to pay claims. Benefits are provided through a consumer-directed health plan (CDHP), a health plan design that combines financial incentives with information about cost and quality to help consumers make better-informed decisions about their healthcare. CDHPs typically have two components: 
• A high-deductible (or “catastrophic”) health plan (HDHP). Such a plan does not pay for the first few thousand dollars of healthcare expenses (the deductible) but usually covers most if not all costs above this amount.  
• A tax-advantaged personal healthcare account. Account funds can be used to pay for healthcare expenses before the deductible is satisfied, and such funds are generally exempt from taxation. 
Because HDHPs do not pay for the first few thousand dollars of expenses, they generally have lower premiums than traditional plans, and the money saved can be used to help fund the personal healthcare account. 
The Evolution of Consumer Choice Models 
CDHPs are not new. They were introduced in the late 1970s, and they have been retooled several times since. All CDHP products provide federal tax advantages while allowing consumers to save money for their healthcare, but each has a unique design and is subject to a unique set of federal rules. Early CDHP models had limited popularity because of restrictions that consumers disliked, but more recent plan types have attempted to improve on earlier models in an effort to widen consumer appeal. 
Flexible Spending Accounts (FSAs) 
Flexible spending accounts (FSAs), a type of benefit arrangement offered under a employer’s cafeteria plan, were introduced in the late 1970s and are the oldest type of personal healthcare account. FSAs are established by employers, and employees may elect to participate in them for reimbursement of certain expenses while saving money on taxes. There are dependent care FSAs (used mostly for child care expenses) and healthcare FSAs for uninsured (out-of-pocket) medical expenses. 
Employers, employees, or both may contribute to an FSA, although most often only the employee contributes. Before the start of the plan year, employees designate the amount they want deducted from their wages that year and contributed to their FSA, and equal amounts are withheld from each paycheck throughout the year. However, employers must make the full annual amount elected by the employee available at the start of the plan year.  
Example: Chloe chooses to contribute $1,200 annually to her FSA, so $50 is deducted from each semi-monthly paycheck. But from the start of the year, she can receive $1,200 in reimbursement. So when she incurs $500 in expenses in January, they are reimbursed, even though she contributed only $50. 
In 2008 22 percent of employees of large firms participated in a healthcare FSA, and participation was considerably lower in small firms.6 The limited popularity of FSAs is partly the result of design-related restrictions on funding and use, including these rules: 
• The "use-it-or-lose-it" rule. FSA balances must be used during the plan year and may not be "rolled over" to the following year. (Some employers have a two-anda-half-month ?grace period.?) 
• The lack of portability. Employees who change jobs or retire cannot take FSAs with them. 
Archer Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs) 
Archer medical savings accounts (MSAs) are tax-exempt trust or custodial accounts authorized as a demonstration project by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). MSAs were limited to helping self-employed individuals and employees of small businesses obtain reimbursement of medical care costs. Participants had to enroll in an MSA-qualified high-deductible health plan. 
In regard to rollover and portability, MSAs provided considerably greater flexibility than FSAs, but nonetheless they failed to achieve popularity during their demonstration period. The demonstration program was phased out at the end of 2007, and MSAs were essentially replaced by health savings accounts (HSAs) (see below). 
Health Reimbursement Arrangements (HRAs) 
Health reimbursement arrangements (HRAs) were introduced by employers in 2000 (although they were not officially recognized as HRAs until 2002). The establishment and funding of HRAs is limited exclusively to employers; self-employed individuals are not eligible, and employees cannot make contributions. HRA funds may (at the option of the employer) be rolled over from year to year tax-free, increasing their appeal. There is some limited portability. 
Employer ?contributions? are something of a misnomer, as no funding is required until an employee submits a claim for reimbursement. Essentially, an HRA is an employer’s agreement that it will reimburse for allowed healthcare expenses up to a certain amount. Employer reimbursements from an HRA are not taxable income for the employee, and the employer can deduct (as a business expense) the amount it actually reimburses. There is no regulatory limit to the amount an employer may reimburse through an HRA, although all employers set their own limits. 
A survey of employers found that between 2 and 3 percent of workers covered by health insurance were enrolled in an HRA between 2006 and 2009.7 Although employees like the rollover feature (when offered by their employer) and tax-free reimbursement, they dislike that the fact that the account might not be portable if they change companies. 
Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) 
The Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003 amended the Internal Revenue Code to provide an income tax deduction to individuals for amounts contributed to a health savings account (HSA), and this accelerated the consumer-directed healthcare movement. The HSA is designed to address several of the limitations of earlier personal healthcare accounts. It provides for funding by both employees and employers, direct employee ownership of the account, true account portability, year-to-year rollover, and investment opportunities (see Table 9.1). 
Table 9.1 
Comparing FSAs, HRAs, and HSAs 
 
FSA 
HRA 
HSA 
Funded by 
Employee (and sometimes employer) 
Employer only 
Employee, employer, or individual 
Portable? 
No 
Limited, at employer option 
Yes 
Annual roll-over? 
No 
Employer option 
Yes 
Earns interest? 
No 
No 
Yes 
 
To set up and contribute to an HSA, an individual must be covered by a high-deductible health plan that meets specific federal requirements (a qualified high-deductible health plan). She must also not have other health insurance that is not a highdeductible plan, not be enrolled in Medicare, and not be claimed as a dependent on someone else's tax return. 
To be an HSA-qualified HDHP, a plan must have an annual deductible of at least $1,200 for self-only coverage or $2,400 for family coverage (2010 and 2011, adjusted annually). 
A qualified HDHP must also have an annual limit on out-of-pocket expenses (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) no greater than $5,950 for self-only coverage and $11,900 for family coverage. The deductible and out-of-pocket limit of a qualified HDHP must apply to all benefits, including prescription drugs, covered by the plan. The only exception is preventive care, which may be exempted from the deductible. 
The Benefits of CDHPs 
The movement toward consumer choice models has increased health coverage by making available a more affordable option for individuals and small employers, and it has also provided large employers with additional tools to control their health benefit costs. In addition, CDHPs empower consumers to manage their own healthcare, giving them strong incentives to shop around for products and services that represent the greatest value for their healthcare dollars. 
But not everyone is convinced that CDHPs are a good idea. Critics claim that the consumer choice movement is merely an effort to shift even more costs to individuals. They contend that CDHPs are a good choice only for the healthy and wealthy and will lead to adverse selection. Some worry that consumers may avoid necessary medical treatment because of cost concerns and will not take advantage of preventive care services. 
However, a number of studies of CDHPs have now been conducted,8 and they provide support for the following conclusions:  
• Switching from traditional health insurance to a CDHP brings substantial cost reductions, and there are indications that CDHP costs rise at a lower rate than in traditional coverage. 
• Cost savings are not the result of insureds not receiving necessary care, but rather come from cost-effective consumer choices that do not compromise quality of care or health. These include greater use of preventive care and generic drugs, less inappropriate use of emergency room care, and better management of chronic conditions. 
• Most employers are not shifting costs to employees. 
Enrollment Trends 
Participation in CDHPs is growing, as the following statistics show: 
• Enrollment in CDHPs rose to an estimated 23 million people in 2009, up from 18 million in 2008, a 27 percent increase in just one year.9  
• Enrollment in HSA/HDHP combinations increased about ten-fold between 2005 and 2010, and these plans now cover more than 10 million people (see Figure 
9.5).10  
 In 2009 22.7 percent of the under-65 population was enrolled in an HDHP, up from 19.4 percent in the previous year.11  
Market analysts expect these trends to continue, with participation in CDHPs increasing rapidly in the near future.12 Because FSAs and HRAs have been around for some time, most of the new demand will be for HSAs, so in the near term health plans and CDHP vendors will focus on meeting employer and employee demand for HSA products. As the market matures, HSA product functionality and capabilities are expected to evolve to keep pace with employer and consumer needs. Healthcare reform may also have an impact on the CDHP market (discussed in the following module). 

Figure 9.5 
 
Conclusion 
Escalating healthcare expenditures have increased the demand for lower-cost health coverage options that empower consumers and provide incentives for cost-conscious decision-making. This has given rise to the consumer choice movement. Consumerdirected health plans, which have evolved substantially over the past three decades, combine a core contribution by employers with increased choice and financial responsibility for employees. The most recent type of CDHP to emerge—health savings accounts coupled with qualified high-deductible health plans—appears to be meeting the promise of the consumer choice philosophy and will likely see rapid enrollment growth in the years ahead. 
 
Notes 
                                                 
1  America's Health Insurance Plans, "The Factors Fueling Rising Healthcare Costs 2006" (PricewaterhouseCoopers analysis prepared for AHIP), January 2006. 2  Ibid. 
3 Ibid. 
Page 
                                                                                                                                                 
4  Ginsburg, Paul B., "Competition in Health Care: Its Evolution Over the Past Decade," Health Affairs, November/December 2005. 5  Herrick, Devon M., "Flexible Spending Accounts: Making a Good Deal Better," Brief Analysis, National Center for Policy Analysis, December 6, 2004. 
6 Mercer Human Resources Consulting, National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans 
2008. Cited in ?Health Care Flexible Spending Accounts? by Janemarie Mulvey, Congressional Research Service, May 11, 2010.  
7 The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust, Employer Health Benefits 2009 Annual Survey, 2009. Cited in ?Tax-Advantaged Accounts for Health Care Expenses: Side-by-Side Comparison? by Carol Rapaport, Congressional Research Service, June 18, 2010.  8
  American Academy of Actuaries, ?Emerging Data on Consumer-Driven Health Plans,? May 2009. Aetna, ?Sixth Annual Aetna HealthFund Study,? April 2010. Cigna, ?Cigna Choice Fund Experience Study,? December 2009. 
9  American Association of Preferred Provider Organizations, ?Small Employers Lead CDHP Adoption in 2009,? 2010. 
10
  America’s Health Insurance Plans Center for Policy and Research, ?January 2010 Census Shows 10 Million People Covered by HSA/High-Deductible Health Plans,? May 2010. 
11
  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, ?Health Insurance Coverage: Early Release of Estimates from the National Health Interview Survey, January – September 2009,? March 2010. 
12
 Aite Group, ?Consumer-Directed Healthcare: Sizing the Market,? February 2010. 
Page 
Types of Consumer-Directed Health Plans 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• identify high-deductible health plans and the three major types of consumerdirected health plans (CDHPs);  describe the main features of FSAs and HRAs; 
• summarize the HSA rules regarding eligibility, qualified HDHPs, preventive care, contributions, and distributions; and   discuss the potential impact of healthcare reform on CDHPs. 
In the last module we introduced the consumer-directed health plan (CDHP) products available today. In this module we will provide a closer look at flexible spending accounts (FSAs) and health reimbursement arrangements (HRAs) and a detailed examination of the fastest-growing type of CDHP, health savings accounts (HSAs). We will conclude by discussing how healthcare reform legislation may affect these DCHPs. 
Consumer-Directed Health Plans 
In today's healthcare market, employers are looking for lower-cost health coverage options, while consumers are seeking broad choice among providers and more control over their healthcare dollars. Consumer-directed health plans are increasingly popular products that address these needs. 
As discussed in the preceding module, CDHPs generally combine a core funding contribution by employers with increased choice and financial responsibility for employees and greater accountability for health plans and providers. CDHPs typically couple a high-deductible health plan with a tax-advantaged personal healthcare account. 
High-Deductible Health Plans 
Most CDHPs are based on a high-deductible health plan (HDHP), a plan with a considerably higher deductible than traditional insurance products. HDHPs generally have lower premiums than traditional plans, and the money saved can be placed in a personal healthcare account. 
Some HDHPs do not apply the high deductible to preventive care, which has first-dollar coverage or a low copayment. HSA-qualified HDHPs are subject to federal rules that specify minimum deductibles and limit annual out-of-pocket expenses. 
The Three Major Types of CDHPs  
CDHPs are not new. They were introduced in the 1970s and have been retooled in several iterations over the past three decades. This evolution has produced three major types of CDHP accounts: 

 flexible spending account (FSA),   health reimbursement arrangement (HRA), and   health savings account (HSA).  
All of these products provide federal tax advantages while allowing consumers to save money for their healthcare. Each has a unique design and is subject to a unique set of federal rules. 
Flexible Spending Accounts 
Flexible spending accounts (FSAs) were introduced in the late 1970s and are the oldest type of CDHP account. FSAs are established by employers to cover uninsured healthcare expenses or dependent care expenses of their employees. FSAs may be funded by the employee with pretax dollars, by the employer, or both. They may be offered on a stand-alone basis or in conjunction with any type of health insurance plan or other employer-provided benefits. They can be offered under a employer’s cafeteria plan, which may offer a wider spectrum of benefits than just an FSA. An employee can choose to participate in an FSA even if he does not participate in any other benefit plan offered by the employer. Because FSAs can only be established by employers, they are not an option for self-employed individuals. 
In 2007 health FSAs were available to about a third of all workers. But participation is not high—about half of employees of large firms had access to them, but in 2008 only 22 percent participated.1 The limited popularity of FSAs is partly a result of design-related restrictions on funding and use, including the following: 
 “Use-it-or-lose-it” provision. Balances in an FSA may not be rolled over from year to year. Employers have the option of allowing funds for one year to be used for expenses incurred in the first two and a half months of the following year. 
 Lack of portability. Employees who change jobs or retire cannot take FSAs with them, and employers are not allowed to refund FSA balances to employees when they leave. (However, ex-employees continuing their health coverage under COBRA can access funds from their FSA.) 
Health Reimbursement Arrangements 
Health reimbursement arrangements (HRAs) were introduced in 2000 and gained momentum after a 2002 U.S. Treasury Department ruling clarified their treatment in the tax code. The establishment and funding of HRAs is exclusively limited to employers; self-employed individuals are not eligible, and employees cannot make contributions. Employers decide how much money to “contribute” to HRAs, and employees can withdraw funds for expenses allowed under the employer's HRA plan documents. HRAs may be offered on a stand-alone basis or in conjunction with any type of health insurance plan, including an HDHP. 
Unlike with an FSA, HRA funds may, at the option of the employer, be rolled over from year to year tax-free, increasing their appeal. There is some limited portability: As with an FSA, an ex-employee continuing health coverage under COBRA can access her HRA. And unlike an FSA, an employer may structure its HRA to allow balances of employees leaving the company to be rolled over to an HRA of their new employer, and it may allow ex-employees to be reimbursed from their remaining HRA balances for expenses incurred while they were still employed. 
A survey of employers found that between 2 and 3 percent of the workers covered by health insurance were enrolled in an HRA between 2006 and 2009.2 Although employees like the roll-over feature of HRAs, they dislike that the account might not be portable if they change companies. Health Savings Accounts  
The Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003 accelerated the consumer-directed healthcare movement by creating the most recent CDHP option, the health savings account (HSA). The HSA is designed to address several of the limitations of previous personal healthcare account products: It allows funding by both employees and employers and provides for employee (or individual) account ownership, portability, annual rollover, and tax-free investment earnings and gains. 
Eligibility 
To set up and contribute to an HSA, an individual must: 
 be covered by a qualified high-deductible health plan (one that meets federal requirements); 
 not have other broad health coverage that is not an HDHP (Limited coverage such as accident insurance, dental or vision benefits, workers' compensation, disability income insurance, or long-term care insurance is permitted.);  
 not be enrolled in Medicare (Medicare beneficiaries cannot contribute to an HSA, but they may spend money contributed to an HSA before they enrolled in Medicare.); and  
 not be claimed as a dependent on someone else's tax return.  
Qualified HDHPs 
An HSA must be coupled with a qualified high-deductible health plan (an HDHP that meets certain federal requirements). A qualified HDHP must have (2010 and 2011 figures, adjusted annually): 
• an annual deductible of at least $1,200 for self-only coverage or $2,400 for family coverage.  
• an annual limit on out-of-pocket expenses (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) no greater than $5,950 for self-only coverage or $11,900 for family coverage. 
The deductible and out-of-pocket limit must apply to all benefits covered by the plan, including prescription drugs. The only exception permitted is for preventive care services. If an HDHP provides benefits through a network of healthcare providers, the deductible and out-of-pocket limit do not apply to services provided outside of the network. 
Preventive Care  
A qualified HDHP may cover certain types of preventive care without a deductible or with a lower deductible. These services include:  	routine prenatal and well-child care;  	immunizations for children and adults;  	periodic health evaluations, including tests and diagnostic procedures ordered with routine examinations such as annual physicals; 
 	smoking cessation programs;  	obesity/weight-loss programs; and  	screening services (such as mammography, Pap testing, and screening for glaucoma and tuberculosis). 
Also exempt is treatment that is incidental or ancillary to a preventive care service or screening, where it would be unreasonable or impractical to perform another procedure to treat the condition (for instance, the removal of polyps during a diagnostic colonoscopy). 
Limited categories of medications are also considered preventive care, including: 
 medications to prevent a disease or condition when a person has risk factors but no symptoms (for instance, cholesterol-lowering medication to help prevent heart disease for people with high cholesterol); and  
 medications to prevent recurrence of a disease from which a person has recovered (for instance, ACE inhibitors for individuals who previously had a heart attack or stroke).  
Contributions 
The rules allow tax-free contributions to an HSA by an employee, an employer, a selfemployed individual, or a family member on behalf of an eligible individual. Each year the total contributions to an HSA cannot exceed a maximum, $3,050 for an individual or $6,150 for a family (2010 and 2011, adjusted annually). Individuals age 55 or older can make additional "catch-up" annual contributions of $1,000. Individuals are responsible for ensuring that their annual HSA contributions do not exceed the maximum allowed by law. 
Distributions  
Individuals can withdraw HSA funds tax-free to pay qualified medical expenses, as defined by the IRS. These include but are not limited to doctor's office visits, hospital care, dental care, vision care, prescription drugs, and over-the-counter medications, as well as deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance. Under healthcare reform, over-thecounter medications will not qualify unless prescribed by a doctor (effective January 1, 2011). 
In general individuals cannot use HSA funds tax-free to pay health insurance premiums. But they may do so for the following:  COBRA continuation coverage; 
 tax-qualified long-term care insurance (LTCI);  
 Medicare premiums (Parts A, B, D, and Medicare Advantage), but not Medicare supplement (Medigap) policies (only persons 65 or older); and 
 health coverage while receiving unemployment compensation. 
Unlike with an FSA or HRA, an individual may withdraw money from an HSA for items other than qualified medical expenses or allowed premiums. However, such withdrawals are subject to federal income tax plus an excise tax (10 percent in 2010, under healthcare reform increasing to 20 percent in 2011). If the individual is 65 or older or if the withdrawal is made after the death or disability of the individual, regular income tax applies but not the excise tax. 
Healthcare Reform 
The healthcare reform legislation of 2010 will likely have only a modest impact on CDHPs and their associated healthcare accounts (FSAs, HRAs, and HSAs). There were proposals to eliminate some of these options (in particular FSAs and HRAs), but they did not survive the legislative process. 
We have already mentioned two changes affecting healthcare accounts: the increase from 10 to 20 percent in the excise tax on HSA withdrawals for purposes other than qualified medical expenses, and the elimination from qualified medical expenses of overthe-counter medications not prescribed by a doctor. Two other provisions will affect these accounts:  
• Small employers will be prohibited (effective 2014) from offering health plans with deductibles greater than $2,000 (individual) or $4,000 (family) unless the employer offers a healthcare FSA that reimburses the difference between this limit and the deductible. 
• There will be an annual limit on employee contributions to a healthcare FSA (effective 2013) of $2,500 (adjusted annually). This could encourage people to switch to HSAs, which have higher limits.  
The impact on CDHPs of some elements of healthcare reform will not be clear until the federal regulations implementing the legislation are developed. The following provisions may or may not negatively affect HDHPs depending on how the regulations are written.  
• Minimum actuarial value. All health insurance plans will be required to be designed to pay, on average, at least 60 percent of the expected cost of services covered by the plan. If the regulations are written to consider only benefits paid, some HDHPs might not meet this standard, whereas if funds deposited into HSAs are taken into account, most likely will.  
• Medical loss ratio. Insurers will be required to pay at least 80 percent of their premium revenues on medical claims. This could be challenging for HDHPs because they must incur the administrative cost of processing claims incurred before the deductible is met, even though such claims are not paid and do not count toward the medical loss ratio. 
• Preventive care. All health insurance plans will be required to provide first-dollar coverage (no cost-sharing) of preventive care services. Most qualified HDHPs already provide this, but the healthcare reform regulations defining “preventive care” will need to be consistent with the IRS definition for HSA purposes or plans may no longer meet the HSA requirements. 
On the other hand, some healthcare reform provisions could encourage CDHP enrollment. There will be an excise tax on high-value employer-sponsored health coverage, and in many cases the best way to avoid this tax may be a CDHP. Subsidies will be provided to help people with income below a certain level pay health insurance premiums, and many people may find that a CDHP is the best way to make the most of these subsidies.  
Conclusion 
Although they have existed in various forms for over 30 years, consumer-directed health plans have entered the spotlight in recent years in response to the demand for lowercost health coverage options that offer greater choice and control. CDHPs meet this need by combining a core contribution by employers with increased choice and financial responsibility for employees, along with increased accountability for health plans and providers.  
 
 
Notes 
                                                 
1
 Bureau of Labor Statistics. Table 24: “Pretax benefits: Access, private industry workers,” 
National Compensation Survey, March 2007. Mercer Human Resources Consulting, National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans 2008. Both cited in “Health Care Flexible Spending Accounts” by Janemarie Mulvey, Congressional Research Service, May 11, 2010.  2  The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust, Employer Health 
Benefits 2009 Annual Survey, 2009. Cited in “Tax-Advantaged Accounts for Health Care Expenses: Side-by-Side Comparison” by Carol Rapaport, Congressional Research Service, June 18, 2010. 

11 Provider Organizations 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• discuss the types and levels of provider integration,  describe and distinguish between the main physician-only integration models,  describe and distinguish between the main physician-hospital integration models,   discuss the assumption of insurance risk by provider organizations, and 
• describe accountable care organizations (ACOs) and patient-centered medical homes (PCMHs). 
This course is about health plans, but in this module we look at another element of the healthcare environment—healthcare providers integrated into organizations. We explain what provider integration is and what its advantages are, survey the types and levels of provider integration, and describe the most important provider organization models. Provider Integration 
Different healthcare provider organizations are characterized by different types and levels of provider integration. There are two main types provider integration: 
• Structural integration brings separate providers under common ownership or control.  
• Operational integration consolidates into a single operation functions that were previously carried out independently by different providers. 
Structural Integration 
Structural integration may be complete or partial. Complete structural integration includes mergers and acquisitions.  
• A merger occurs when two or more separate providers are legally joined. One provider may absorb the others entirely, or, in a consolidation, the providers may combine to form a new organization, with all the original companies being dissolved. 
• In an acquisition one organization buys another organization. An organization that owns other organizations is known as the parent company, and the owned organizations are called subsidiaries. 
One type of partial structural integration is the joint venture. In a joint venture two or more separate organizations combine resources to achieve a certain objective. The participating companies share ownership of the venture and responsibility for its operations. Although there is generally a single source of control over the joint venture, the venture itself is not a separate legal entity. Usually, the organizations maintain their separate ownership as well as separate control over their operations outside of the joint venture. 
Some provider organizations have minimal structural integration. The providers who are members of these organization enter into contracts in which they agree to cooperate and act as one body in certain business transactions. But each provider maintains completely separate ownership and may also maintain complete control over its operations in all other business transactions. 
Operational Integration 
Operational integration can take the form of business integration or clinical integration. 
• Business integration combines business (nonclinical) functions performed independently into a single operation. For example, a group of doctors might form an organization to carry out billing, collections, and contracting with health plans for all of them. 
• Clinical integration involves making healthcare services available to patients from the same organization or entity.  
Clinical integration has certain advantages: Administrative processes are often more streamlined than when a number of providers furnish services independently. And patient information is often consolidated into one medical record in one location, which can improve the quality of care. 
Example: Joanne receives her healthcare from the Superior Healthcare System, an integrated delivery system (discussed below). Joanne visits her primary care physician, who sends her for blood tests and x-rays and refers her to a specialist. Eventually, she goes into the hospital and undergoes surgery, and afterwards she is visited by a home healthcare nurse. All the services that Joanne receives are furnished by a single provider organization, Superior, and all the Superior healthcare professionals who treat her work with the same medical record. In this way, each provider who encounters her has access to the same accurate and complete information regarding her health status and history, helping to ensure that she receives consistent and high-quality care. In addition, she encounters a minimum of administrative requirements when receiving her various healthcare services. 
The Level of Integration—A Continuum 
The amount of operational integration in each provider organization falls somewhere on a continuum stretching from minimally integrated to fully integrated. The figure below shows the continuum of operational integration and where the different models of provider organizations we will study in this module usually fall in this continuum. 
Provider Organizations—The Continuum of Operational Integration 
Less Integrated 	 	 	 	 	 	 	        More Integrated 
Physician-Only Models 
IPA 	 	GPWW and MSO 	PPM company 	consolidated medical group 
Physician-Hospital Models 
PHO  	 	 	 	 	 	 	IDS and medical foundation 
On the left side of the continuum are the provider organizations with the lowest level of integration. In these models the provider members create an organization to perform a single business function, and apart from this function the providers maintain fully independent operations. For example, providers often form legal entities whose sole purpose is to negotiate with health plans on behalf of the member providers. Many independent practice associations (IPAs) and physician-hospital organizations (PHOs) have this low level of integration. 
On the right side are highly integrated provider organizations, including the consolidated medical group, the integrated delivery system (IDS), and the medical foundation. As an example, an IDS has a high level of both business and clinical integration and offers consumers the full range of healthcare services. 
In the middle of the integration continuum are organizations that handle a number of services for providers (usually business services) but leave other functions in the providers’ hands. These organizations include group practices without walls (GPWWs), management services organizations (MSOs), and physician practice management (PPM) companies. They may negotiate contracts with health plans on behalf of providers and may integrate administrative support services include billing, collections, claims processing, staffing, appointment scheduling, medical record keeping, and equipment purchase and maintenance. They may also integrate practice management services such as financial services, legal services, information management, marketing, and strategic planning. 
The Advantages of Integration 
Integration can be advantageous for providers as well as for consumers, health plans, and purchasers. For providers the main advantages are as follows: 
• Efficiency. Greater operating efficiency and effectiveness can be realized. If instead of duplicating tasks performed by other providers, providers share functions, the cost to each provider is often less. 
• Expertise. An organization performing business functions for several providers may possess or develop considerable expertise in those functions. As a result, providers can benefit from improvement in marketing, strategic planning, information systems, and other business services.  
• Negotiating strength. Integration can improve providers’ negotiating position in relation to health plans. A group of providers can offer a more extensive array of services to a health plan than can a single provider, and consequently the health plan may be willing and able to offer more favorable contract terms to the provider group than to individual providers.  
The main disadvantage to providers of integration is a loss of autonomy and control over their own work environment. Some providers prefer to work as independent owners of small businesses rather than as members of a larger group or employees of an organization. 
For health plans, purchasers, and consumers, provider integration has the potential for greater provider operating efficiency and lower costs. Integration can also make it easier for consumers to obtain healthcare by enabling them to access a wide array of services from one organization. 
Provider Integration Models 
Provider integration takes many forms, and in the following sections we will look at the most common models of provider organizations. Although we describe the characteristics of each model, it should be kept in mind that, as with the models of HMOs and other health plans, features are always in flux and distinctions between models may not be clear-cut. Some organizations you encounter may differ from our descriptions.  
Some models integrate physicians only, others integrate physicians with one or more hospitals. Some organizations (both physician-only or physician-hospital), in addition to providing healthcare services, assume the insurance risk related to those services. We will describe first physician-only models, then physician-hospital models, then organizations that assume insurance risk. 
Physician-Only Models 
There are several organizational models that integrate, to some extent, the practices of a number of physicians. Most of them contract with health plans (and sometimes directly with purchasers) on behalf of their member physicians, and many also handle other services for providers. 
Independent Practice Association (IPA) 
One minimally integrated physician-only organization is the independent practice association (IPA). An IPA is made up of individual physicians or physicians in small group practices. It generally performs only one service for its member physicians— contracting with health plans on their behalf. We discussed IPAs earlier in relation to IPA model HMOs.  
In terms of contractual relationships there are two types of IPAs: 
• In the messenger model the IPA does not enter into a contract with a health plan. Its role is only to negotiate on behalf of its member physicians the terms of contracts between those physicians and health plans. The physicians themselves enter into contracts directly with the health plans, based on the terms negotiated by the IPA. The messenger model is most often used with fee-for-service or discounted fee-for-service compensation arrangements. 
• More commonly, the physicians each contract with the IPA, and the IPA enters into a contract with the health plan. In this model, the method by which the IPA is compensated by the health plan may or may not be same as the method by which the IPA compensates its member physicians. For example, an HMO might compensate an IPA by capitation, and the IPA might compensate its doctors by capitation or by some other method, such as fee-for-service or discounted feefor-service. 
An IPA (or other organization) that accepts capitation from a health plan may limit its risk by buying stop-loss insurance. In this arrangement, if the IPA spends more than a certain amount per year on an individual, the insurer issuing the stop-loss insurance reimburses the IPA for expenditures in excess of that amount. For example, an IPA might purchase stop-loss insurance to cover all spending on any individual in excess of $50,000 in a year. 
Group Practice Without Walls (GPWW) 
A model that generally has a greater degree of integration than an IPA is a group practice without walls (GPWW), also called a clinic without walls. This is a legal entity that combines multiple independent physician practices under one umbrella organization and performs certain business operations for the member practices or arranges for these operations to be performed. A GPWW may maintain its own facility for business operations, or it may hire another company to provide this function. Physician income is usually based on the performance of both the individual physician and the group. 
A GPWW may be owned by its member physicians, by a hospital, or by a physician practice management company (see below). When the member physicians own the GPWW, how does it differ from an IPA? A GPWW performs business operations for physician members, while IPA members generally conduct their own business operations. (The IPA only negotiates contracts.) On the other hand, a GPWW differs from a consolidated medical group (below) in that the GPWW physicians maintain their practices independently at multiple locations.  Management Services Organization (MSO) 
Another physician-only model in the middle of the integration continuum is the management services organization (MSO). An MSO, owned by a hospital or a group of investors, provides management and administrative support services to individual physicians or small group practices. One purpose of MSOs is to relieve physicians of nonmedical business functions so that they can concentrate on the clinical aspects of their practices. Because MSOs integrate business functions that were previously separate, they can generally achieve economies of scale, and these cost savings may be passed on to physicians, health plans, and purchasers.  
In some cases MSOs simply provide business services to physicians for a fee. In other cases MSOs purchase the tangible assets (buildings, equipment, and supplies) of physicians and lease them back to them. In these situations, the physicians continue to own their own medical records and health plan contracts and continue to practice in their own offices. This arrangement relieves physicians of yet another nonmedical aspect of running a practice.  
One type of MSO is the physician practice management (PPM) company. This is an organization, owned by a group of investors, that purchases physician practices. Note that PPM companies generally purchase the entire practice, not just the tangible assets as discussed above. The PPM company usually gives a physician a long-term contract to continue working in his practice, and sometimes it gives him an ownership interest in the company. But the PPM company manages the practice, particularly the non-medical aspects. Most PPM companies focus on developing a network of either primary care physicians or physicians in a certain specialty, such as cardiology or oncology. 
Consolidated Medical Group 
Full structural and operational integration of physician practices is embodied by the consolidated medical group, also referred to as the medical group practice or clinic model. This is a large single medical practice that operates in one or a few facilities rather than in many independent offices. The group may be formed from previously independent practices. The group is often owned by a parent company or a hospital, and it may be a single-specialty or multi-specialty practice.  
A consolidated medical group can offer several advantages to health plans, including: 
 lower costs because of economies of scale resulting from the group’s integrated and centralized operations,  access to a sizeable and stable group of physicians, and 
 greater ability to monitor and manage quality and utilization.  
Physician-Hospital Models 
In addition to organizations that integrate physician practices, there are also those that integrate, to a lesser or greater extent, physicians with one or more hospitals. These organizations contract with health plans on behalf of the physicians and hospitals they represent and may contract directly with purchasers. Some serve other purposes in addition to contracting.  
Physician-Hospital Organization 
A physician-hospital organization (PHO) is a joint venture of a hospital and many or all of its admitting physicians. Its primary purposes are contracting with health plans and marketing. Apart from these functions, the physician practices and hospitals typically do not merge their operations. They continue to be independently owned and operated, but they serve patients under the terms of the contract between the PHO and the health plan. Participating physicians and hospitals share responsibility for managing and administering the PHO. 
Many PHOs are affiliations of one or more hospitals and an IPA or other association of physicians. A PHO is similar to an IPA, but it includes at least one hospital and usually a wider variety of providers. Sometimes a rural community contracts with a PHO and becomes a party to a health plan contract, resulting in an entity called a physician hospital community organization (PHCO). 
A PHO may be classified as one of two types: 
 Membership in an open PHO is available to all of a hospital’s eligible medical staff. Typically, open PHOs have more specialists than PCPs. Sometimes an IPA or a GPWW represents all or some of the physicians in an open PHO. 
 A closed PHO limits the number of specialists for each specialty. A variation of the closed PHO is the specialist PHO, which includes only providers of a certain specialty, such as psychiatrists or pediatricians. 
Common compensation arrangements for PCPs in a PHO are discounted fees and capitation. Specialists are typically paid on a discounted FFS basis. Some PHOs with  HMO contracts compensate hospitals through capitation, but many others use per diem payments. 
Because a PHO can offer a broad range of healthcare services under one umbrella, participating in a PHO gives physicians and hospitals greater leverage in negotiating contracts with health plans and employers. Also, joining a PHO enables hospitals to improve their relationships and enhance their collaboration with physicians and market their services more effectively. Other reasons hospitals and doctors form PHOs include sharing financial risk and enhancing the quality of care. 
Integrated Delivery System (IDS) 
An integrated delivery system (IDS) is a provider organization that is fully integrated operationally (both in terms of business and clinical) and provides a full range of healthcare services, including physician services, hospital services, and ancillary services. Because of this comprehensiveness, an IDS can be in a strong position to attract and negotiate with health plans or purchasers.  
Although an IDS is fully integrated operationally, it may or may not be highly integrated structurally.  
• Some IDSs are structured as contracts between providers that maintain ownership and substantial control over their own practices.  
• In other IDSs provider practices are owned and controlled by the IDS. This type, the employment model IDS, generally owns or is affiliated with a hospital, purchases or establishes physician practices, and retains the physicians as employees.  
• Some IDSs assume insurance risk (as discussed below). 
Medical Foundation 
In some states laws prohibit a corporation from owning a physician practice, making an employment model IDS impossible. In these states some hospitals and health plans have instead created medical foundations, not-for-profit entities that purchase and manage physician practices. However, to maintain its not-for-profit status, a medical foundation must meet certain requirements related to the benefit it provides to the community, and this may make it difficult for it to compete with other organizations that are not subject to this requirement.  
 
Provider Organizations That Assume Insurance Risk 
Some of the provider organizations described in this module (such as some IDSs, consolidated medical groups, IPAs, and PHOs) not only integrate provider functions but assume insurance risk. They are commonly referred to as at-risk organizations. An atrisk provider organization contracts directly with purchasers and health plans.  
For a health plan, contracting with an at-risk provider organization has the advantage of relieving the plan of all or part of the responsibility of developing a provider network. But certain issues may arise in relation to the division of responsibilities between the plan and the provider organization. 
• The provider organization may want to handle credentialing and claims payment because it does so for other payors (such as Medicare) and wants to spread the costs over a broader business base. But the health plan may also want to perform these functions so that it can make sure they are done correctly and in accordance with the contract. The health plan also needs claims data for quality and utilization management.  
• To control costs more effectively, the health plan may want fewer network providers than the provider organization.  
This division of functions may be governed by state regulations or influenced by the requirements of accreditation agencies. For example, in many states laws require HMOs to perform certain functions.  
To provide insurance an at-risk provider organization needs to develop, acquire, or otherwise gain access to expertise in many areas of insurance operations, including actuarial science, underwriting, claims, and quality and utilization management. The provider organization can perform these functions itself or contract with another entity such as an insurance company or HMO to provide them.  
Depending on the state in which it operates and exactly how it operates, an at-risk provider organization may have to obtain either an HMO or an insurance company license and comply with the laws and regulations that apply to such organizations. In some states an at-risk provider organization does not need an insurance license but is required to maintain substantial financial reserves. 
Emerging Models 
Accountable Care Organization (ACO) 
Accountable care organizations (ACOs) have been receiving considerable attention since the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) (healthcare reform), which seeks to promote them. An ACO is a group of healthcare providers who deliver comprehensive and coordinated care with an emphasis on screening, prevention, and ongoing management of chronic diseases, thereby improving the quality of care received by patients. For example, in an ACO a primary care physician and a specialist might work together to treat an adult with type II diabetes, monitoring her diet and medication to prevent hospitalization and the possible amputation of a limb. 
The ACA directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to create the Medicare Shared Savings Program, which encourages groups of providers to come together to form ACOs to manage and coordinate inpatient and outpatient care for Medicare fee-for-serve beneficiaries. ACOs that meet certain quality standards will be eligible to receive payments based on a share of the savings generated. 
The ACA sets forth only broad outlines of this program, specifying that an ACO must: 
• be willing to become accountable for the overall quality and cost of the care of the Medicare beneficiaries assigned to it;  agree to participate in the program for at least three years; 
• establish a structure that will allow the organization to receive and distribute payments for shared savings to participating providers;  have enough primary care providers to care for the beneficiaries assigned to it; 
• provide HHS with information on the provider network and other data for use in assigning beneficiaries, implementing quality, and other reporting requirements as well as determining shared savings payments; 
• have a leadership and management structure that includes clinical and administrative systems; 
• define processes to promote evidence-based medicine and patient engagement, report on quality and cost measures, and coordinate care (such as through the use of telehealth and other technologies); and   demonstrate to HHS that it meets criteria for patient centered care. 
Details on how ACOs are to be set up and the standards that will apply to them will be determined by HHS and issued in regulations. The Medicare Shared Savings Program is scheduled to be launched January 1, 2012. Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH) 

Federal legislation in recent years has authorized and funded medical home demonstration projects for Medicare fee-for-service patients with chronic conditions, and the ACA seeks to promote medical homes in various ways. A patient-centered medical home (PCMH) is a model of healthcare delivery in which each patient has a personal physician who is responsible for providing or coordinating care for her on a continuous basis. In an effort to achieve better health outcomes and more efficient use of resources, the PCMH model seeks to replace healthcare delivery in which a person receives various medical services from a succession of different providers in reaction to illnesses that arise with a strong, long-term physician-patient relationship and continuity and coordination of care.  
The main features of a patient-centered medical home include the following:1 
• The personal physician. Each patient in a PCMH has an ongoing relationship with a personal physician. The personal physician serves as the patient’s first contact point when she needs care, and he coordinates her care with specialists, other healthcare professionals, laboratories, and hospitals. He is responsible for providing or coordinating preventive care, the treatment of acute illnesses and chronic conditions, and (where appropriate) assistance with end-of-life issues. He is responsible for care across settings, including the doctor’s office, the hospital, and the patient’s home. He also plays an educational role, helping patients understand test results, procedures, and treatment options. 
• Physician-directed care. In a PCMH the personal physician leads a team of providers who collectively assume responsibility for ongoing care of the patient. For example, for a particular patient the personal doctor might coordinate the services of a specialist, a lab technician, and a dietician. 
• Whole person and patient-centered care. The strong and ongoing relationship between the patient and the personal physician allows an approach that includes the whole person and is patient-centered. Instead of medical conditions being treated in isolation, a patient’s total physical condition and health history are taken into account more fully, so that overlapping and negative interactions of treatments are avoided. Also, a personal doctor can be aware of both a patient’s mind and body; can consider her personal values, preferences, and quality of life in weighing clinical alternatives and priorities; and can educate her and her family about her medical options and how to stay healthy. 
• Coordination of care. The PCMH model coordinates healthcare not just within a medical practice, but across all components of the healthcare system including specialty care, hospitals, nursing homes, home health agencies, communitybased services, and even care provided by family and friends. PCMH coordination relies heavily on technology, including electronic medical records and databases and registries. 
• Quality and safety. The PCMH model seeks to provide optimal outcomes by delivering evidenced-based medicine and using clinical decision-making support tools to guide treatment. The PCMH design also avoids patient safety risks that can arise from the lack of communication and coordination of treatments that often occur in a fragmented healthcare delivery system. 
Page 
• Enhanced access to care. The PCMH model seeks to make access to care more available through expanded office hours and technology. Alternatives to face-to-face communications, such as email and telephone conversations, can play a role in non-emergency situations. 
In a PCMH model compensation is ideally based on a mix that includes fee-for-service payment for physician visits, additional compensation for care management, and incentive payments for achieving measurable quality goals. This approach recognizes the time and effort physicians spend guiding patients’ overall care and pays them for it, in contrast to pure capitation and pure fee-for-service. 
Note 
                                                 
1  This discussion draws in part on a publication of the Robert Graham Center, Center for Policy Studies in Family Medicine and Primary Care: The Patient-Centered Medical Home: History, Seven Core Features, and Transformational Change, November 2007, page 5. 
Page 
12 Health Plan Structure and Management 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 compare for-profit and not-for-profit health plans and stock and mutual insurance companies,  describe the role of a health plan’s board of directors,  identify a health plan’s key management positions and their functions, and  list some of the main committees that serve a health plan.  
This module gives the essential elements of the structure, governance, and management of a health plan. We learn about the main types of plans, the role of the board of directors, the main management positions and their responsibilities, and the main committees and the areas they address.  The Structure of a Health Plan 
The founders of a health plan decide the type of structure they want for the organization based on their objectives. Businesses may choose to organize in one of three basic ways—as a sole proprietorship, a partnership, or a corporation. Most health plans are corporations. A corporation is an organization that is recognized by a governmental authority as a legal entity separate from its owners. Corporations have two major characteristics that set them apart from sole proprietorships and partnerships. First, because corporations are considered to be distinct legal entities, a corporation can be a party in a legal action. Second, a corporation continues beyond the death of any or all of its owners. Furthermore, a corporation that is well managed can survive the personal misfortunes of any of its owners. This fact is reassuring to people who might invest in the corporation or buy its products.  
Holding Companies and Subsidiaries 
A parent company is one that owns another company. A subsidiary is a company that is owned by another company, its parent. A holding company is a company whose sole business is the ownership of other companies, which are its subsidiaries. In other words, a holding company is also a parent. For instance, a holding company might own both an insurance company (a subsidiary) and a PPO (another subsidiary). Two subsidiaries of the same company are known as sister corporations.  
Subsidiary companies are formed for specific purposes within the holding company framework. Originally, the holding company concept was used to acquire a group of companies in the same or related lines of business in order to maximize expertise and market presence in that field. Today the holding company arrangement is also used to control companies in widely differing industries, enabling the holding company to diversify its interests and protect itself from the risks involved in concentrating on just one kind of business.  

Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Health Plans  
A health plan may organize under a taxable not-for-profit form, a tax-exempt not-for- profit form, or a for-profit form. The form chosen will have many implications for the plan and its organizers, including effects on taxation, regulation, and the raising of capital. Traditionally, HMOs and Blue Cross and Blue Shield (BCBS) health plans operated as not-for-profit entities, although many have converted to for-profit. The IRS classifies some not-for-profit health plans as tax-exempt but not not-for-profit BCBS plans.  
Tax-exempt status is obviously is a significant advantage. Not-for-profit health plans that have it are not required to pay federal and state income tax and may not pay property taxes. In many cases, however, even tax-exempt plans must pay state premium taxes. 
On the other hand, tax-exempt plans must adhere to numerous restrictive conditions to qualify for the exemption. Essentially, they must operate for non-profit purposes only, with only incidental benefits going to private individuals involved in the plan, and they may not engaging in lobbying or political activities. They must be extremely careful when engaging in business activities with taxable entities—if a taxable entity benefits from a plan’s tax-exempt status in some way, the plan could lose its exemption. The IRS regularly reviews tax-exempt plans to confirm that they continue to meet the requirements. 
Another disadvantage of not-for-profit plans, whether taxable or tax-exempt, is having limited means of raising capital for expansion or major long-term projects, such as developing information systems and medical management infrastructure. Not-for-profit plans must typically rely on income from operations for the large cash outlays needed for such purposes. It is for this reason that the majority of new health plans are organized as for-profit entities, and many existing non-profits, including BCBS plans, have converted to for-profit status or created for-profit subsidiaries.  
Stock and Mutual Companies 
Most large companies, in insurance and other industries, are stock companies. In a stock company, people may purchase shares of the company’s stock. These are literally “shares” of ownership of the company—the stockholders of the company are each part-owners of the company. The stockholders control the company through stockholder voting and share the company’s profits, which they receive in the form of periodic payments called dividends.  
A mutual company is different—it has no stockholders. The ownership and control of a mutual insurance company is held by its policyholders, who elect its board of directors. 
Mutual insurers do not exist for the purpose of making a profit and paying dividends (although if a mutual insurer builds up a large surplus, it may return money to its policyholders as dividends). 
Most health insurance companies are stock companies, although mutual companies account for a substantial share of business, as many large companies are mutual. A company may convert from mutual to stock in a process called demutualization. The primary reason for demutualization is that a stock company can more easily raise capital because it can issue additional stock to the public. For example, a stock company health plan wishing to acquire a physician practice can sell new shares of stock to fund the acquisition. Conversion from stock to mutual (mutualization) is also possible; it was once common but no longer is. 
Components of a Health Plan Organization 
Owners 
Theoretically, at the top of a health plan’s organization chart are its owners—the stockholders of a stock company or the policyholders of a mutual company. The owners are the ultimate source of authority. However, they do not usually direct the actual operations of the company; instead they elect a board of directors to whom they delegate their authority. 
Board of Directors 
The board of directors is the primary governing body of a health plan. All for-profit and most not-for-profit plans have a board of directors. The board’s major responsibility is to ensure the continued existence of the organization. To this end, the board periodically reviews the activities and finances of the company and sets company policies. The board appoints the chief executive officer (CEO) and may also appoint other top executives (or the CEO may appoint them), and it holds these executives responsible for the company’s operations. In most plans meetings of the board of directors are held either monthly or quarterly, and special meetings may be called when necessary. 
A minimum number of directors is usually specified by the charter of the corporation and sometimes by state insurance regulations. The CEO and a few other top executives may or may not be members of the board. Board members who hold positions in the company are known as inside directors, and those who do not are outside directors. Outside directors are usually business people, professionals in academia and health services, and community leaders. For a not-for-profit plan to qualify for tax exemption, no more than a certain percentage (usually 20 percent) of board members can be inside directors, and the rest must be representatives of the community. To protect the interests of consumers, some states permit only a minority of board members to be from the healthcare industry.  
The following responsibilities are typically part of a board of directors’ overall governance and oversight function: 
 	the authorization of major financial transactions, including mergers and acquisitions and large capital expenditures; 
 the monitoring of financial performance, including earnings and losses resulting from plan operations as well as investment strategy and performance; 
 the appointment and evaluation of the CEO (and sometimes also some senior executives);   participation in corporate strategic planning;  the evaluation and approval of operational policies and procedures; and  oversight of the quality management (QM) program, including review of the QM plan and feedback to the medical director and the QM committee.  
In some health plans the board also has the responsibility to hear final appeals of member complaints. 
In addition, the board of directors has specific legal duties and obligations as defined by state corporate codes, the organization’s articles of incorporation, and plan bylaws. For example, as fiduciaries (individuals or entities that hold a position of special trust and confidence), board members have a duty to act in the best interests of the organization and not in their own personal business interests. The board also has a duty to supervise the performance of its officers and outside advisors. If the board does not fulfill its responsibilities, it may be held liable for its actions. The board may also be held liable for the plan’s actions if those actions harm another party. 
Key Management Positions 
Responsibility for a health plan’s day-to-day operations typically rests with key senior managers who report directly to the CEO. The number, roles, titles, and reporting responsibilities of these managers vary according to the type of plan, its size and complexity, its legal organization, and its product offerings. Different management components can be structured in any number of ways. However, there are some management positions that are common to all corporations or to all health plans, and we will survey these here. 
The managers listed below have general corporate responsibilities. They are found in all industries, and their duties are not specific to healthcare. 
 	The chief executive officer (CEO) is responsible for the organization’s overall operation, general administration, and public affairs. All other key managers report to the CEO, who reports directly to the board of directors. 
 The chief financial officer (CFO) or finance director is responsible for accounting activities such as budget planning, accounting, and internal audits, and financial operations such as membership billing and underwriting. 
 The chief operations officer (COO) or director of operations oversees programs and services that support the organization as a whole, including enrollment, claims, member services, office management, human resources, and similar functions. 
 The chief marketing officer (CMO) or marketing director oversees the organization’s marketing and sales activities, including advertising, client relations, and enrollment and sales forecasting. 
 The chief information officer (CIO) is responsible for the plan’s computer hardware and software systems, its telephone and electronic communication systems, and its electronic commerce (e-commerce) capabilities. These systems are vital to a plan’s medical management activities as well as its nonclinical operations. The importance of this function is likely to grow as information 
systems become more and more sophisticated and demands from purchasers, plan members, and regulatory and accrediting agencies increase. 
Health plan management also includes positions that are unique to healthcare organizations, including the medical director, the network management director, and the corporate compliance director. 
Medical Director 
Most health plans have a medical director or chief medical officer (CMO), a physician executive who is responsible for the quality and cost-effectiveness of the medical care delivered by the plan’s providers. In some plans the medical director participates in dayto-day operations such as non-routine authorization decisions, claim reviews, utilization review, and provider education, while in others she develops medical management policies and procedures but is not involved in operations.  
Large or complex plans often divide operational responsibility for medical management among additional associate medical directors. For example, a plan may assign responsibility for functions such as utilization review or quality management to associate medical directors, or it may divide its service area into regions, each overseen by an associate director.  
Network Management Director.  
A plan’s medical director may also be responsible for network management, but in large plans this function is often separate. In this case a network management director is responsible for developing and managing the plan’s provider networks, and she has authority over such activities as recruiting, credentialing, contracting, service, and performance management for providers. 
Corporate Compliance Director  
To ensure that they are adhering to the many state and federal laws and regulations that apply to them, many health plans have instituted formal compliance programs headed by a corporate compliance director—an executive-level manager dedicated to overseeing compliance activities. And in most cases, this is a regulatory requirement— for instance under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and for plans the participate in the Medicare Advantage program. In addition, under HIPAA’s Privacy and Security Rules, health plans must designate an official or staff with responsibility for the organization's privacy and security policies. 
The corporate compliance director is responsible for overseeing efforts to detect and prevent conduct by the health plan and its agents that violates legal requirements. These efforts include: 
 developing and implementing written standards and procedures to reduce criminal misconduct by the health plan’s employees and agents;   assigning upper-level personnel to oversee compliance;  
 avoiding the delegation of authority to persons known to or inclined to engage in illegal activities;   effectively communicating corporate standards to all employees and agents;  
 implementing reasonable measures to achieve compliance, including auditing and reporting systems;  
 consistently enforcing corporate standards through appropriate disciplinary mechanisms;  
 taking all reasonable steps to respond appropriately to existing misconduct and prevent future misconduct; and  
 establishing and enforcing rules regarding confidentiality and security of member information.  
The nature of a health plan’s compliance program and the scope of the director’s responsibilities depend on the size and financial condition of the organization, the vulnerability of the organization to misconduct, and the organization’s history of involvement in fraud or misconduct. 
Committees 
Committees are a means of incorporating nonmanagement input into a health plan’s policies and procedures. Standing committees are permanent and serve as long-term advisory bodies on ongoing issues such as financial management, compliance, quality management, utilization management, strategic planning, and compensation. Ad hoc committees (or special committees) are convened to address specific management concerns and typically disbanded once the issue has been resolved. For example, a special litigation committee may be temporarily established to oversee a legal challenge regarding breach of fiduciary duty. 
General Corporate Committees 
Some committees are common to all corporations (not healthcare-specific): 
• The executive committee handles issues related to overall organizational policy, including lines of business and employment policies. 
• The strategic planning committee directs the company’s strategic direction and goals. 
• The compensation committee addresses issues related to compensation of the CEO and the plan’s general compensation and employee benefit policies. 
• The finance committee sets the organization’s broad investment policies and reviews and approves financial and accounting activities. 
• The nominating committee makes nominations for the company’s officers as required in the organization’s bylaws. 
Health Plan Committees 
Other committees are unique to healthcare organizations: 
• The Quality Management (QM) Committee oversees the plan’s quality assessment and improvement activities in both clinical and nonclinical areas. This committee identifies the appropriate issues for monitoring, evaluates the results of quality studies to identify and prioritize opportunities for performance improvement, develops quality improvement action plans and oversees their implementation, monitors and evaluates the overall effectiveness of the organization’s quality improvement efforts, and oversees the organization’s accreditation efforts. The QM committee also reviews and updates the organization’s QM plan for approval by the board of directors and recommends policy decisions to the board. Some plans have a Quality Council, which focuses on quality improvement efforts and includes both plan managers and network providers. This is required for NCQA accreditation (discussed in a later module). A plan’s Executive Quality Improvement Committee oversees the quality management committee, accreditation efforts, and other quality functions.  
• The Peer Review Committee reviews cases in which the quality of the healthcare delivered was questionable or problematic. This committee also formulates, approves, and monitors corrective action plans as needed. In some plans, this function is handled by the QM committee. 
• The Utilization Management (UM) Committee reviews and updates the plan’s UM program and establishes utilization review (UR) protocols. The UM committee may also be responsible for reviewing referral and utilization patterns and utilization decisions based on medical appropriateness. 
• The Appeals Review Committee reviews appeals related to medical management or coverage determinations. The panel consists of various health plan personnel and healthcare professionals who specialize in the medical conditions under review. Most states require health plans to have an Appeals Review Committee. 
• The Medical Advisory Committee evaluates proposed policies and action plans related to clinical practice management, including changes in provider contracts and compensation and authorization procedures. This committee also reviews data regarding new medical technology and examines proposed medical policies. 
• The Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committee develops, updates, and administers the plan’s formulary and regularly reviews clinical trial reports, drug utilization reports, current and proposed therapeutic guidelines, and economic data on drugs. 
• The Credentialing Committee establishes and updates credentialing processes and criteria and reviews provider credentials during the credentialing and recredentialing processes. In some plans the QM committee handles credentialing. 
• The Corporate Compliance Committee monitors and guides all compliance  activities, including the appointment of the corporate compliance director, approval of compliance program policies and procedures, review of the organization’s annual compliance plan, evaluation of internal and external audits to identify potential risks, and implementation of corrective and preventive actions. 
• The Ethics Committee educates employees and contracted providers about ethical professional and business conduct, provides guidance in difficult cases, and may discipline employees for unethical actions. 
In different health plans, some of the above committees may be combined in different ways. Some of these committees include only plan employees, such as program directors and managers, but many have external members, such as network physicians.  

13 Network Structure and Management 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• identify the main considerations in a market analysis for a health plan network; 
• list the factors in deciding the number, types, and locations of providers in a network;  describe the main steps of the provider recruitment and selection process;  describe provider credentialing; and   identify the most important provisions of the provider contract. 
As you have previously learned, health plans arrange for the delivery of high-quality, cost-effective healthcare services to plan members. This is accomplished by the development and management of the plan’s provider network. Since the plan’s members interact with the organization primarily through its providers, the steps the plan takes to design, assemble, monitor, and maintain its network are critical to the success of the plan. 
In this module we begin our discussion of network management by describing factors that influence network design. Next we address some standard considerations in network structure, such as size and composition. We then discuss some of the issues health plans address when selecting, credentialing, negotiating with, and contracting with providers. We finish the module with an overview of the activities that are necessary to maintain the network and cultivate provider satisfaction. 
Market Analysis 
To establish a provider network, a health plan must understand the characteristics of its proposed service area, the needs of its proposed members, and its proposed products and focus. A market analysis is the tool used by plans to gather and analyze information on characteristics of the market, providers, competitors, employers, service area, general population, and the health plan itself. Market analysis also includes an analysis of current economic conditions. 
The Market  
One purpose of analyzing the market is to understand the level of health plan activity in a market—referred to as market maturity. The level of maturity in the market often indicates how knowledgeable providers and consumers are about health plans, how receptive providers and consumers are likely to be to health plans, and how active competition is among health plans in the service area. Markets at different levels of maturity require different network management approaches and strategies. For example, in a market with little health plan activity, consumers and purchasers are likely to be 
more receptive to loosely managed plans (such as PPOs) than to tightly managed plans (HMOs). 
The Provider Community 
The purpose of analyzing the provider community is to understand the types, numbers, and locations of healthcare providers in the proposed service area, as well as utilization patterns and healthcare costs. Providers include physicians, hospitals (the services they provide and the number of beds), and other practitioners and facilities. Analysis of the provider community also includes understanding the locations of the providers, including distances between provider locations and members’ homes and workplaces as well as any geographic barriers that may affect access. 
It is critical for the health plan to also understand existing referral patterns and established provider relationships in the service area, as well as hospital admitting/procedural privileges. Many physicians have established relationships with particular healthcare professionals in their community. In some communities groups of physicians may be affiliated with one entity, such as a hospital, a physician group or organization, or a physician/hospital-type organization. Understanding the existing referral patterns and the relationships of the providers in the proposed service area allows the plan to utilize network approaches and techniques reflective of these relationships. For example, if many of the physicians in the service area are affiliated with a single entity, the plan will most likely need to contract with that entity, while if most physicians are not affiliated with a single entity, the plan has more contracting options. 
The Competition 
Analysis of the competition includes understanding and assessing other health plans in the market. This assessment should include the following types of information for each competitor plan in the proposed service area:  
• competitor product types and premiums;  
• competitor network characteristics, including provider numbers, types, and locations and physician-to-member ratios;   cost-containment strategies used by competitors; and   provider satisfaction with competitors. 
Employers 
Analysis of the employers in the area includes understanding the size of employers. Large employers (more than 1,000 employees) tend to adopt health plans more quickly and are more likely to offer a choice of health plans than small companies. Small companies (less than 100 employees) may have less experience with health plans and lack the financial and administrative resources necessary to offer multiple health plan options. 
The Service Area 
Analysis of the proposed service area includes understanding whether it is primarily rural, suburban, or urban.  
• Rural communities typically have limited numbers and types of providers and facilities, including few hospitals. This makes it difficult for health plans to build a comprehensive network that satisfies member demand for a complete range of healthcare services. Also, in rural areas with few providers the health plan may have little or no choice about which facilities to include in its network. 
• Urban areas (population greater than 500,000) have larger numbers of physicians and facilities. The characteristics of urban areas offer health plans more flexibility in provider contracting. However, with more providers there is also increased pressure on the plan to offer larger networks. This in turn can complicate the plan’s management of costs, quality, and satisfaction levels. 
The Population 
Analysis of the population includes understanding key demographic characteristics. Characteristics of the population in the proposed market often influence the mix of providers and facilities included in the network. Some important population characteristics are ages, income levels, ethnicities, and religions. For example, health plan networks that serve the elderly (Medicare) often need to include post-acute care facilities (rehabilitation centers and skilled nursing facilities) in their networks. Plans that serve populations with large ethnic, racial, or religious groups should have networks that accommodate diverse language, cultural, and medical needs. 
The Health Plan  
The characteristics of the health plan affect the requirements for its network. Some of the characteristics of a plan that affect network requirements are:  
 products offered by the health plan (number and types),  geographic scope and market focus,  particular population, and  plan type. 
Health plans that offer more than one type of plan may choose to develop separate networks for each plan type. Another option is to coordinate provider networks through a system of interrelated networks, sometimes referred to as nested, customized, or subnetworks. Typically plans that offer only one type of health plan establish a single network designed around a unique set of goals and strategies. 
Economic Conditions 
Network design and management can be influenced by the level of growth or decline in an economy. A growing economy typically leads to increases in employment, population growth, and eventually growth in the medical community such as more hospitals, physicians, and other providers. On the other hand, a declining economy would likely have the opposite effect.  
Regulatory Requirements and Accreditation Guidelines 
In addition to understanding the characteristics of the proposed market, a health plan must understand and comply with the wide range of federal and state laws and regulations. And if the plan is or plans to be accredited, it must meet the standards set by accrediting agencies that are applicable to its network. 
Laws and Regulations 
Laws and regulations affecting health plans will be discussed in more detail in a later module, but at this point it is important to understand that some are applicable to a plan’s provider network, including those that address issues such as network adequacy, patient access to healthcare services, quality of care, mandated benefits, and providers’ right to contract. In this section we will summarize some of these laws. 
The HMO Act of 1973 requires federally qualified HMOs to provide: 
• geographic accessibility to primary care and most specialty providers with “reasonable promptness” and “within generally accepted norms for meeting projected enrollment needs,” 
• access to medically necessary emergency services 24 hours a day, seven days a week; and  a detailed description of service areas and provider locations. 
The Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) program requires health plans serving federal employees and their dependents to provide: 
immediate access to emergency services, urgent appointments within 24 hours, routine appointments within one month, and average office waiting times of no more than 30 minutes. 
The NAIC Managed Care Plan Network Adequacy Model Act, adopted in 1996, offers guidelines for states to use in measuring network adequacy. Network adequacy is the extent to which a network offers the appropriate types and numbers of providers in the appropriate geographic distribution according to the needs of the plan’s members. The Model Act includes standards for: 
provider-enrollee ratios, geographic accessibility, appointment waiting times, hours of operation, and 

volume of technical and specialty services available in the service area. 
Under the Model Act health plans are required to file an access plan showing how specific standards will be met.  
State any willing provider laws require health plans to allow any provider who is willing to accept the terms and conditions of the plan’s provider contract to participate in the plan’s network. A plan’s ability to include economic criteria (such as average cost per case or per member) as a term or condition of the contract depends on particular state laws. In some cases any willing provider laws apply to PPOs but not HMOs and similar plans. 
State mandated benefit laws typically require health plans to: 
• include in the plan’s benefit design specific benefits (such as chiropractics, hospice, home healthcare, and hospitalization for maternity care of a specified length); 
• include in the network specified providers or provider classes (such as behavioral healthcare professionals); and 
• grant direct access without referral by the primary care physician to specified provider classes (such as dermatologists, obstetricians/gynecologists, and pediatricians). 
As of 2014, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) of 2010 (commonly known as healthcare reform) will require most health plans to cover a comprehensive set of healthcare services, including preventive and wellness care, prescription drugs, mental healthcare, emergency care and ambulance services, and others, as stipulated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS). The Secretary will also have the responsibility of developing regulations to ensure a sufficient choice of providers by plan members as well as network adequacy and access.  
Guidelines of Accrediting Agencies 
Standards established by independent accrediting organizations also influence network design and management. The National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) and URAC are two of the best known accrediting agencies. You will learn more about health plan accreditation in a later module. 
Network Structure, Composition, and Size 
Structure 
Health plans typically structure their networks in one of two ways, either as a closed panel or an open panel.  
 In a closed panel plan, providers see only health plan members and generally operate out of health plan facilities and offices. Providers are either employed directly by the plan (staff model) or belong to a group of providers that hold contracts with the health plan (group model). 
In an open panel plan, independent physicians or providers who meet the health plan’s standards of care may be eligible to contract with the plan. Providers see both plan members and nonmembers and typically serve members out of their own facilities and offices. 
Whether a plan structures its network as a closed or open panel network depends on the structure and characteristics of the health plan.  
Composition 
As we learned previously, a health plan ensures that its members have convenient access to healthcare services. To provide good access, health plans must see that their network includes;   the appropriate types of providers,  the appropriate number of providers, and  providers in the appropriate locations. 
Regulations and standards require that networks be adequate. Guidelines have been established and are used to develop and maintain networks that are adequate in structure, composition, and size to meet the needs of plan members. The composition of a plan’s network is important to the health plan for many reasons, including marketing and product differentiation, member satisfaction and retention, and compliance with laws and standards specific to network adequacy.  
Types of Providers 
A health plan’s provider network typically includes a mix of the following types of providers: 
• Primary care providers (PCPs). In most cases primary care providers are general practitioners, family practitioners, internists, or pediatricians. Some plans classify obstetricians/gynecologists (OB/GYNs) as primary care providers, while others consider them specialists. Some plans also include nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) in their primary care panels, but NPs and PAs typically work under the supervision of a physician, and their ability to provide services independently may be limited by state law. 
• Specialists. A specialist is a healthcare professional whose practice is limited to a certain branch of medicine, based on specific services or procedures (such as anesthesia), specific body systems (neurology), certain types of diseases (oncology), or an age group (pediatrics or gerontology). Ideally, all specialty categories will be represented in a provider network. 
• Hospitalists. A hospitalist is a physician who exclusively manages inpatient hospital care. Hospitalists may be employed by a hospital or be in a medical group. Hospitalists allow other physicians to focus on the outpatient care of their patients. 
Healthcare facilities. Health plans contract with a variety of facilities including hospitals, ambulatory surgery facilities, ambulatory diagnostic and treatment centers, retail health clinics, sub-acute care facilities, and skilled nursing facilities. 
• Ancillary service providers. Ancillary services is an umbrella term for a variety of healthcare services that are an adjunct to primary, specialty, and facility-based care. Ancillary services include diagnostic services (such as laboratories and radiology), therapeutic services (including home healthcare), physical and occupational therapist, pharmacists, and durable medical equipment and supply companies. 
Number and Locations of Providers  
Factors such as health plan characteristics, provider access, population characteristics, purchaser and consumer preferences, and health plan goals influence network design. We will now review how these factors specifically influence the number and locations of healthcare practitioners, hospitals, and facilities needed by the health plan. 
Practitioners 
• Plan characteristics. 
o Level of managed care. In general, more highly managed plans (plans that practice more managed care techniques and concepts) need fewer providers than more loosely managed plans. For instance, an HMO, which is highly managed, requires fewer providers than does a PPO or POS product with the same number of members. 
o Size of plan. Large plans typically need fewer providers per 1,000 members than do small plans because large plans can benefit from economies of scale and other efficiencies. However, if the membership in a large plan is geographically widespread, the plan will likely need a broader panel to provide adequate access to care and services. 
• Provider access. 
o A provider-to-member ratio is a ratio of the number of providers available to plan members to the number of members (usually number of providers per 1,000 members). Ratios can be used for both PCPs and specialists. 
o Geographic distribution is based on the number of providers within a certain number of miles and/or a certain number of minutes of driving time. Software is used to measure the accessibility of healthcare networks and evaluate geographic distribution for specific provider types. For example, to maximize access a plan may require that its network have at least two PCPs within a three-mile radius of each ZIP code in the service area. Or a network might include at least two PCPs within a given radius of members’ homes (such as an eight-mile radius for urban areas or a 20-mile radius for rural areas). Drive time refers to how long members must drive to reach a provider. Drive time is typically set at 15 minutes for urban areas and up to 30 minutes for rural areas. In some 

states, health plan licensure bodies (such as the Department of Insurance) have established requirements for access based on time or distance. 
o Other considerations. Provider capacity to accept patients and the clinical skills of various providers are other factors that can also impact staffing needs. 
• Population characteristics. Demographic characteristics of plan membership such as age, sex, income, ethnicity, and education level influence both the numbers and types of providers in the network. For example, networks of plans with large numbers of women and children typically include large numbers of OB/GYNs and pediatricians. Plan networks serving Medicare beneficiaries typically have larger numbers of providers and a broader mix of specialists than networks serving similarly sized younger populations. 
• Purchaser and consumer preferences. Primary factors that influence customers’ selections among health plans are perceptions of quality, access to care, and costs. 
o Perceived quality. If perceived quality is the dominant consideration, then the actual composition of the network and provider selection criteria are key elements of the network development. 
o Access. If access is the major issue for customers, a large, very inclusive network is desirable. 
* PCPs. For purchasers and members the primary care panel is typically the largest and most important component of the provider network. Larger PCP panels tend to result in higher market share and high levels of member acceptance and satisfaction, but they can result in higher plan costs. Limiting the size of the PCP panel can reduce costs for administration and network management, but these reductions are generally outweighed by customer preferences for larger PCP panels. 
* Specialists. The size of the specialist panel is typically less important to customers that the size of the PCP panel. Therefore, health plans can often limit specialist panels to include only providers who offer the highest-quality, most cost-effective care in the service area. 
Hospitals and Other Facilities 
The goal of a health plan is to include enough facilities in its network to effectively serve the plan’s membership. Therefore, the network needs the appropriate number of hospitals and facilities of the appropriate types and in the appropriate locations. Many of the factors that affect the number of practitioners needed in a network also affect the number and locations of hospitals and other facilities. Considerations include: 
• access by plan members, 
service capacity, types and quality of services offered, accreditation status, reputation within the service area, cost and use of resources, level of participation in health plans, and willingness to agree to contract terms acceptable to the health plan. 
Member preference may also affect the number of facilities included in a network if preferences are strongly divided among facilities. Also, if a plan wants to contract with a hospital that is part of a multi-hospital entity, the plan may also have to contract with the other hospitals that belong to the entity. 
Provider Recruitment and Selection 
Recruitment 
During a health plan’s analysis of the market, discussed earlier in this module, the plan gathers, analyzes, and understands important information about the provider community in the service area, including the number and locations of providers. The following sources provide additional information about providers and may be used in the recruitment process: 
• Purchasers, plan members, plan personnel, and other providers. 
Recommendations from purchasers and enrollees are very valuable to the plan. Inclusion of providers recommended by purchasers and enrollees can give the health plan a competitive advantage when negotiating with purchasers and can also help sell the plan to potential members. 
• Local, state, and national medical societies 
• Directories and lists 
• Provider directories from competing plans 
During the recruitment phase of the network development process, a health plan typically sends a mass mailing to the providers in the service area. This mailing introduces the health plan and gives information about it. It usually describes the plan’s credentialing process and may include a copy of the plan’s fee schedule and a provider contract. 
Selection 
To be selected by a health plan for its network, a provider must demonstrate to the plan that she is able to meet the needs of the plan and its members. Major components of provider selection process are: 
• application, 
credentialing, and  recredentialing. 
These are discussed below. 
Application 
The selection process begins with the submission of an application by the provider. Although application forms vary, most include questions on the following: 
basic demographic information office information (location, phone numbers, limitations) education and training work history professional licenses certifications (specialty, DEA) specialty care certification or eligibility hospital affiliations malpractice insurance information malpractice claims history references 
Credentialing 
Once a health plan receives the provider application, it begins the credentialing process. This includes reviewing and verifying the information submitted on the application form, determining the provider’s current clinical competence, and verifying that the provider meets the health plan’s preestablished criteria for participation in the network.  
The Importance of Credentialing 
The goal of health plans is to offer members a delivery network that includes high-quality providers. Specifically, credentialing addresses these objectives: 
• evaluating providers and determining which are the most qualified, 
• minimizing the liability and other legal risks associated with medical practice by eliminating providers whose histories and practice patterns indicate that they might pose a legal risk for the plan, and 
• meeting the requirements of accrediting bodies and regulators for accreditation or licensure.  
Because credentialing is such an important part of the selection process, we will examine credentialing in detail, review who typically performs credentialing, describe 

how the credentialing process works, and discuss standards used in the credentialing process. 
Credentialing—Who Does It? 
The responsibility for credentialing varies from plan to plan. In some plans credentialing is handled by a committee or department, while in others it is performed by an individual. In still other plans, credentialing is contracted to external entities called credentialing verification organizations (CVOs). Practitioners are usually included in the credentialing committee or serve on the review body; they provide technical knowledge and peer perspectives in the credentialing process. 
The Credentialing Process 
As mentioned, the credentialing process begins with the provider’s submission to the health plan of a completed application (and required supporting documentation). The next steps in the process are completed by the health plan and include: 
 review of the application,  verification of the documentation and information,  determination of the need for additional documentation or follow-up, and  request for any information required to verify credentials. 
The health plan may also perform site inspections of the provider’s offices and may inspect and evaluate medical records on site. Note that the credentialing process typically is completed before the health plan contracts with the provider. 
Standards Used in Credentialing—Guidelines, Policies, Procedures, and Criteria 
Health plans establish and utilize plan-specific guidelines for credentialing, with each plan’s guidelines reflecting the unique characteristics of the plan. Written policies define the requirements for participation in the network and identify the specific documentation that will be used to verify requirements. Procedures describe how the process is performed. Criteria are used to assess a practitioner’s ability to deliver necessary care to health plan members and typically include licensure, relevant training and/or experience, and disclosure of any issues that may affect care delivered (such as health issues).  
Verification 
As noted, during credentialing the plan verifies the information submitted by the provider on the application form and validates that the provider meets the health plan’s preestablished criteria for participation in its network. To ensure that credentialing decisions are based on accurate and current information, health plans are required to obtain documents directly from educational institutions and agencies (primary sources). Health plans typically delegate primary source verification activities to third-party CVOs.  
Many of the standards and criteria used by health plans in credentialing verification are based on existing standards established by accrediting agencies such as URAC. In addition, a health plan is required to obtain information relating to malpractice, licensure, actions taken related to professional reviews, actions taken by the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), and Medicare/Medicaid exclusions. The National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) is a repository for information relating to malpractice, licensure, and actions taken related to professional reviews.  
The National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) 1 
The legislation that led to the creation of the NPDB was enacted because the U.S. Congress believed that the increasing occurrence of medical malpractice litigation and the need to improve the quality of medical care had become nationwide problems that warranted greater efforts than any individual state could undertake. The intent is to improve the quality of healthcare by encouraging state licensing boards, hospitals, and other healthcare entities and professional societies to identify and discipline those who engage in unprofessional behavior, and to restrict the ability of incompetent physicians, dentists, and other healthcare practitioners to move from state to state without disclosure or discovery of previous medical malpractice payment and adverse action history. Adverse actions can involve licensure, clinical privileges, professional society membership, and exclusions from Medicare and Medicaid. 
The NPDB is primarily an alert or flagging system intended to facilitate a comprehensive review of healthcare practitioners' professional credentials. The information contained in the NPDB is intended to direct discrete inquiry into, and scrutiny of, specific areas of a practitioner's licensure, professional society memberships, medical malpractice payment history, and record of clinical privileges. The information contained in the NPDB should be considered together with other relevant data in evaluating a practitioner's credentials; it is intended to augment, not replace, traditional forms of credentials review. 
Credentialing—Organizational Providers 
During the credentialing process, health plans are required to evaluate the quality of organizations such as hospitals, nursing homes, and home health agencies. Health plans must verify that these organizations are in good standing with regulatory bodies and accredited by the appropriate accrediting body.  
The Selection Decision 
The health plan’s decision to either select or not select a provider for its network is based on the needs of the health plan and the provider’s qualifications. Selection decisions cannot be based solely on the provider’s membership in another organization such as a hospital or medical group. Health plans must apply standards consistently and fairly. Applying standards consistency and fairly and adhering to the plan’s written policies and procedures reduce issues that can result in legal actions by providers.  
Recredentialing 
As noted, the credentialing process begins before the provider receives a final contract. Once a plan contracts with a provider, it begins an ongoing process of periodically reviewing the qualifications of the provider and verifying that the provider still meets the standards for participation in the network. This process is known as recredentialing and is typically performed every two to three years. 
During recredentialing the health plan verifies the information in the provider’s credentialing data file that is subject to change over time. Examples include licensure, sanctions, certifications, competence, or health status that might affect the provider’s ability to perform services defined in the health plan contract. Many plans also consider results from its quality management and utilization management programs as well as member satisfaction surveys and any member complaints. Contracting 
Once a health plan has selected a provider for its network, the plan presents to the provider an initial contract that specifies the terms of their agreement. The health plan and provider may negotiate and agree to change some of the terms of the contract. When both parties have reached final agreement on the terms, they each sign the contract and it takes effect. 
A properly executed contract serves the following important purposes:  
• ensuring that both parties understand and consent to their responsibilities to each other, 
• providing a reference for clarification of responsibilities in case there is a misunderstanding or disagreement between the parties, and 
• serving as evidence in a legal action by the aggrieved party if either party feels that the other has failed to live up to its responsibilities. 
Contract Provisions 
Health plan provider contracts generally include many provisions. Provisions may be included in the body of the contract, included in exhibits attached to the contract, or incorporated by reference in the contract. Incorporation by reference occurs when a document is made a part of the contract by being referred to in the body of the contract. For instance, a health plan’s provider manual is often incorporate by reference into provider contracts.  
Since provider contracts are based on the characteristics of the health plan, contracts and contract provisions vary from contract to contract. Important provisions that are typically found in provider contracts are discussed below. 
The Provider Manual 
A provider manual is a document that contains information about a provider’s rights and responsibilities as a part of a health plan’s network. Provider manuals are usually incorporated by reference into the contract or are included as exhibits, as these documents tend to change frequently. By including the provider manual as an exhibit or incorporating it by reference, the manual can be changed without necessitating a change to the entire contract.  
Provider Responsibilities 
The contract defines the responsibilities of both the provider and the health plan. The following are some provider responsibilities commonly found in provider contracts: 
• Provider services. The contract typically includes a general description of the healthcare services that the provider agrees to furnish and a more detailed and specific description of how the services will be provided. 
• Administrative policies. The contract generally defines the health plan’s administrative policies and procedures that the provider agrees to follow. These policies are typically related to billing, including the required type of claim form and coding and requirements for timely filing of claims. 
• Credentialing and recredentialing. Contracts normally require that the provider cooperate with the health plan’s credentialing and recredentialing processes. 
• Utilization management and quality management. The contract generally requires providers to cooperate with the plan’s utilization management and quality management programs. 
• Medical records. The contract typically requires providers to maintain complete and accurate medical records and allow health plan staff to access them when needed. Health plans need access to medical records for a variety of purposes such as quality management, utilization management, accreditation, audits and other types of reviews. 
• Payment in full. Most contracts include a no balance billing provision, which requires the provider to accept the amount that the plan pays for medical services as payment in full and to agree not to bill the plan member for additional amounts except for copayments, coninsurance, and deductibles. Most contracts also include a hold harmless provision, which forbids providers from seeking compensation from patients if the health plan fails to compensate them because of insolvency or for any other reason. 
Health Plan Responsibilities 
The following are some health plan responsibilities commonly found in provider contracts: 
• Payment. The contract specifies how the plan will compensate the provider. Since this changes frequently, it is typically included as an exhibit attached to the contract rather than in the body of the contract. 
• Timely payment. The contract specifies the time period within which the health plan will provide payment to the provider for services rendered. 
• Risk-sharing and incentive programs. The contract describes any incentive or risk-sharing plans such as withhold arrangements. 
• Eligibility information. The contract affirms the health plan’s responsibility to provide information on member eligibility and benefit levels. This information helps providers identify members and services covered by the plan. The contract also specifies how the health plan will provide this information (telephone, VRU, electronically, real time or batch, etc.). 
Termination Provisions 
Termination provisions, which are applicable to both the health plan and provider, stipulate how and under what circumstances the parties may end the contract. Generally, the provider and the health plan have the same rights to terminate the contract. Contracts generally can be terminated with cause or without cause, and health plans use different procedures for each. 
• Termination with cause is permitted by all standard contracts. A termination with cause occurs when one party does not live up to its contractual obligations or breaches the contract. For example, a provider fails to provide the services required by the contract, or a plan fails to compensate the provider. Contracts generally include a cure provision, which gives the party that breaches the contract a specified a time period (usually 60 or 90 days) to remedy the problem and avoid termination. Also, most contracts include a due process clause, which gives a provider that has been terminated with cause the right to appeal. 
• Termination without cause may or may not be allowed by a contract; some states do not permit it. A termination without cause occurs when the plan or provider terminates the contract without providing a reason or offering an appeals process. The terminating party is often required to give at least a 90-day notice. Generally health plans terminate providers without cause for business reasons rather than reasons related to the provider’s performance.  
The Tone of the Contract 
In addition to describing the responsibilities of the parties, the contract gives both parties an opportunity to establish the tone and objectives of the relationship. The contract can define the working relationship between the health plan and the provider as either detailed and formal or open-ended and informal. The contract can also either allow for substantial independent authority or include multiple checks and balances.  
The tone and structure of the contract also provide an opportunity for the health plan to influence the nature of the business relationship with the provider. For example, the provider contract can be used by the plan to establish a collaborative relationship with the provider—one in which the provider is included in decisions regarding policies that affect her, such as quality management or utilization management. These types of relationships tend to result in increased provider cooperation with health plan initiatives. 
Network Maintenance and Provider Services 
Following provider recruitment, selection, and contracting, the health plan focuses on activities essential to maintaining and managing the network. In this section we discuss three important network management functions: provider orientation, peer review, and provider services. 
Provider Orientation 
The health plan provides orientations to introduce itself to new providers and acquaint them with its systems and operations. Also during orientation the plan provides training in various systems such as utilization review, authorization systems, quality control, and others, as well as in processes and information relevant to the provider’s specific contract and services.  
The plan provides a written manual of its policies and procedures relevant to the participating provider. The purpose of this manual is to ensure that the provider understands the various aspects of participation and the procedures to follow. Health plans typically review the manual with the provider during the orientation meeting. 
During orientation the health plan informs the provider of its system of regular communications between the health plan and the providers. Health plans provide updates such as new or revised clinical guidelines, benefit changes and claims/coding information, and other information necessary to keep providers informed of changes and updates. Updates are provided through various mechanisms including meetings, newsletters, and/or bulletins. 
Peer Review 
Another important network management function is peer review. Peer review is the evaluation of a provider’s performance by a peer—usually another provider in the same medical specialty and geographic area. Peer review programs and processes will the discussed in detail in the following module. 
Provider Services 
The goal of health plan provider services is to maintain communications with providers. Provider services staff typically visit provider offices or clinics to distribute, share, and explain information. Provider services staff also give support, provide training to the provider office staff, and in some cases offer onsite problem-solving to providers who are experiencing administrative difficulties. 
The provider services area and staff are also responsible for designing and implementing the health plan’s strategies for ensuring provider satisfaction with the health plan. Strategies used by some plans to increase provider satisfaction include conducting surveys of provider satisfaction and needs; communicating through meetings, newsletters, and office visits; and including providers in decisions and programs that affect them, such as quality and utilization management. 
Conclusion 
In developing and maintaining a provider network, a health plan must consider a large number of factors. In setting up its network, it must look at the existing market, including providers, competitors, employers, population, service area, and economy. The plan must take into account its own characteristics (plan type, products, etc.), as well as applicable laws, regulations, and accreditation standards. The plan must ensure that its network meets the needs of its members in terms of provider types, the number of providers, and their locations. Doing so involves a variety of activities, such as provider recruitment, selection, credentialing, and contracting, as well as ongoing activities needed to maintain the network, such as recredentialing, peer review, and provider services. 
Note 
                                                          
1  National Practitioner Data Bank. August 2010. www.npdb-nipdb.hrsa.gov  

14 Utilization Management 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• identify and describe the main strategies of utilization management;  define case management and describe how it works;  describe disease management; and 
• define clinical practice guidelines, evidence-based healthcare, and health literacy. 
To operate effectively, a health plan must be able to manage both the cost and the quality of healthcare services. Without adequate cost management, a plan may not be able to maintain its financial viability. And without adequate quality management, it may not be able to meet the healthcare and service quality needs of members, providers, purchasers, and regulatory and accrediting bodies. The system that health plans and their providers use to achieve and maintain both high quality and cost-effectiveness is referred to as medical management (or care management). 
Medical management activities can be divided into three broad categories: 
• Utilization management (UM) refers to health plan programs that manage the use of medical services so that plan members receive necessary and appropriate care in a cost-effective manner and in an appropriate setting. Simply stated, the goal of UM is for the member to receive the right services at the right time in the right place. UM includes many strategies, techniques, and approaches, including case management and disease management. 
• Clinical practice management involves the development and implementation of criteria and parameters for the delivery of healthcare services to plan members.  
• Quality management (QM) is an organization-wide process of measuring and improving the quality of the healthcare and services a health plan’s members receive.  
In this module we introduce the basics of utilization management. We begin by describing some UM strategies such as preventive care, self-care, decision support, and utilization review. We then provide an overview of case management and disease management, and we end by discussing three issues that arise in relation to these approaches: clinical practice guidelines, evidence-based healthcare, and health literacy. Note that utilization review is examined in detail in the next module, and quality management is addressed in two later modules. 
 
 
Utilization Management 
Utilization management involves all the components of a health plan’s healthcare delivery system, including primary care, specialty care, and both inpatient and outpatient care in hospitals and other facilities. It also affects emergency care, pharmaceuticals, and ancillary services (such as X-ray and laboratory work). A health plan may conduct its own utilization management, or it may contract with an external organization that specialized in UM to perform some or all UM functions.  
In this section we will look at UM strategies and techniques. How these strategies are applied by a health plan depends on its member population. This is because UM strategies are used either to address the needs of members with existing health conditions (in the case of utilization review, case management, and disease management) or to help members at risk of developing conditions (preventive care). 
Preventive Care Programs 
Preventive care programs are designed to help plan members stay healthy and can reduce healthcare costs by reducing the need for diagnostic and therapeutic services, pharmaceuticals, and inpatient hospital care. Therefore, health plans offer a variety of such programs and encourage members to obtain preventive services.  
Health Risk Assessment 
Not every health plan member needs every type of preventive care. To help determine which programs are likely to be the most effective for their member populations, health plans must identify and assess their members’ healthcare needs and health risks. Health plans typically do this by means of an analysis of healthcare claims and/or a health risk assessment.  
A health risk assessment (HRA) (or health risk appraisal) is a process by which a health plan uses information about a plan member’s current health status, personal and family health history, and health-related behaviors to determine the member’s likelihood of experiencing specific illnesses or injuries. By identifying members who are at risk of developing certain health problems and helping them take steps to reduce their risk, the plan can improve health outcomes, reduce the need for complex and extended care, and reduce costs. 
Health plans can gather HRA information from a variety of sources, including providers, plan records, and surveys administered to members. To analyze HRA data, health plans typically use software programs that enable it to tabulate data for the whole member population or for certain segments based on risk levels for specific diseases and/or demographic characteristics (such as occupation, age, gender, income level, race, or ethnicity).  
Preventive Care Programs 
After a health plan has identified the health risks present in its member population, it can develop and promote appropriate preventive care programs to address the needs of its members. For example, members at high risk of developing coronary artery disease (CAD) can be provided with information about CAD, such as its symptoms, possible complications, and recommendations for reducing risks. Most often members receive such information from their primary care practitioners (PCPs), but it may come directly from the plan. For example, a plan might send members regular reminders about healthy behaviors and encourage screenings at appropriate intervals.  
The preventive care initiatives most often adopted by health plans include the following:  
 Immunization programs monitor and promote the administration of vaccines to children for chicken pox, mumps, and measles, as well as adults for influenza and pneumonia. 
 Health promotion programs (wellness programs) educate members and motivate them to prevent illness and injury and promote good health through lifestyle choices, such as stopping smoking, managing weigh, eating healthily, exercising, and managing stress. Maternity management programs are commonly included in health promotion programs; they provide education to promote prenatal care and help identify high-risk pregnancies. 
 Screening programs seek to determine if a health condition is present even if a member has not experienced symptoms. Commonly used screening tools include blood pressure measurements, cholesterol level checks, fecal occult blood tests, and (for women) cervical cancer screening and mammograms. 
Self-Care Programs 
Health plan members frequently have minor health problems that they can treat themselves without the assistance of healthcare professionals. Self-care programs educate members on how to distinguish between minor illnesses or injuries and serious conditions and how to effectively treat minor problems with readily available means such as diet, application of heat or cold, or over-the-counter medications. These programs can lower healthcare utilization and costs by reducing unnecessary visits to doctors’ offices or emergency rooms. However, self-care programs are not intended to supersede or eliminate physicians’ services but to complement them. 
Plans make self-care information available to members in a variety of ways, including in newsletters, websites, and recorded messages accessible by telephone; through providers; or in group help sessions. Newsletters and websites can include guidance on the treatment of minor illnesses and injuries and instructions on how to perform screenings such as breast or testicular self-examinations, skin cancer checks, or blood pressure monitoring. For members with medical conditions requiring ongoing management (such as arthritis, diabetes, and asthma), there may be more detailed selfcare guides providing easy-to-understand information about the condition and describing steps members can take to reduce symptoms, prevent complications, and improve dayto-day functioning. 
Decision Support Programs 
Plan members often know they need medical care but don’t know which services are most appropriate, so they seek care that is unnecessary or inadequate. Decision support programs provide members with educational materials and advice from healthcare professionals to help them make informed healthcare decisions. The types of decision support programs health plans use most often are: 
• web-based decision support tools,   telephone triage programs, and   shared decision-making programs.  
Web-Based Decision Support Tools 
Health plans maintain websites with health and wellness information for members, and they have developed a number of web-based tools to deliver targeted information and personalized support. In this way plans foster better healthcare decisions by members and reach out to those with chronic conditions, and by doing so they promote the appropriate utilization of healthcare services and improve health outcomes. Some of the most common tools are the following: 
• Health risk assessment (HRA)—an online questionnaire that helps a member accurately determine his health status, gives him a personal risk assessment, and directs him to next-step tools. 
• Health risk tools and trackers—online tools with which members can measure certain indicators of health risk (such as body mass index or BMI) and track their progress toward meeting their health goals (such eating more vegetables or exercising more regularly). 
• Health and prevention information—education on health and fitness topics and on the prevention and treatment of common conditions like hypertension and diabetes.  
• Drug information—comparisons of different drugs used for the same conditions, and sometimes information on drug interactions and on the plan’s drug formulary and how members can save money by using certain drugs. 
• Provider report cards—physician and hospital data to assist consumers in making decisions on where to seek care.  
• Personal health records (PHRs)—an application that enables a person to create, review, annotate, and maintain a record of her health conditions, medications, allergies, vaccination history, visit history, and communications with their healthcare providers, and to share this information with appropriate healthcare providers. 
Telephone Triage Programs 
Many health plans offer telephone triage programs (medical advice lines) to help members determine if they need medical attention and if so what kind. For example, a person may wonder whether a fever and sore throat are simply symptoms of a cold or rather indications of something more serious such as strep throat, and a triage program can advise him. Some of the problems commonly reported are headaches, cough, sore throat, nausea and vomiting, fever, ear pain and stuffiness, skin problems, chest pain, abdominal pain, and lower back pain. 
Telephone triage programs help members decide if they should seek immediate attention at an emergency room, make an appointment with a healthcare provider, or treat the condition themselves. If the situation is urgent, triage staff can notify a local emergency room or urgent care center of the member’s needs and planned arrival. If the case is not urgent but requires care by a physician, staff can assist in scheduling an appointment. In some cases triage staff can also authorize referrals and expedite appointments for specialty care. If self-care is indicated, staff can provide information on ways to relieve symptoms and hasten recovery. 
Telephone triage programs are typically staffed by nurses or nurse practitioners who are trained to assess members’ needs and direct them to the appropriate care. They are generally directed by physicians with relevant clinical experience and training in managing telephone triage lines. Triage programs also use non-clinical personnel to answer calls, obtain non-medical data, and route calls to the appropriate clinical staff.  
Staff use a variety of decision support tools to assist them in handling calls, ranging from simple lists of questions and responses to interactive computer programs with preprogrammed algorithms of questions and instructions. Clinical staff can usually contact the members’ physicians or other healthcare professionals such as pharmacists for direct assistance as well.  
Shared Decision-Making Programs 
Healthcare providers routinely give patients information about procedures or treatment options so that they can make informed choices. Shared decision-making programs take this a step further by providing members with in-depth information about diseases, procedures, and treatment alternatives and encouraging them to actively participate in healthcare decisions. Some plans call this value-based healthcare because the member’s decisions are based on her own personal values as applied to her situation, including her age, general health or quality of life, and perception of the effects of a treatment (such as chemotherapy).  
Although information for shared decision-making comes primarily from healthcare providers, there are a variety of sources. Printed materials, websites, videotapes or audiotapes, personal or group counseling, support groups, and interactive computer programs can provide up-to-date information about conditions, diagnostic and treatment options, and expected outcomes. Health plans can also provide checklists of questions that members can use as a guide in talking to providers or conducting independent research. 
Not all conditions are appropriate for shared decision-making programs. For some illnesses and injuries, the medical community considers one approach to care clearly superior in terms of safety and effectiveness, and the provider may discuss only this approach, its risks and benefits, and the risks of no treatment. For other illnesses and injuries (such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, low back pain, and infertility), several treatment options are accepted as valid and effective, and in these cases shared decision-making allows members to weigh the risks and benefits of various alternatives and to choose their own course of treatment. (In either case, however, the decision is ultimately up to the member.) 
Utilization Review 
Utilization review (UR) is an evaluation of the medical necessity, appropriateness, and cost-effectiveness of healthcare services and treatment plans for a given patient. UR can be conducted before treatment begins (pre-service review), while it is in progress (concurrent review), or after it ends (post-service review). UR is most often used for hospital admissions but may also be applied to some outpatient services. 
Utilization review is performed by healthcare professionals, such as nurses or physicians, employed by or contracted with the health plan. Many health plans contract with an outside utilization review organization (URO). Because a URO is independent of the health plan, its involvement can give patients and purchasers added assurance that UR decisions are correct and appropriate. Health plans must give members and providers the right to appeal decision to not approve certain services, and a plan may contract appeals to a URO. 
Case Management 
A key utilization management technique is case management, a process of identifying members with special healthcare needs, developing an individualized strategy to meet their needs, and coordinating and monitoring their healthcare. Case management is sometimes referred to as resource management as a key concept is to assist the member in finding and utilizing available and applicable resources, which include but are not limited to healthcare.  
Case management programs are designed to:  
• improve or stabilize a member’s overall health status by preventing complications and the deterioration of existing medical conditions,  optimize the use of healthcare and other resources,  improve member compliance with provider recommendations for care,  improve coordination and continuity of care, and  utilize community resources to enhance and support the member’s health. 
The ultimate goal is to achieve the optimal healthcare outcome in an efficient and costeffective manner. The case management process includes five basic steps: case identification, assessment, planning, implementation/monitoring, and evaluation. 
The Application of Case Management 
Health plans commonly use case management for high-risk, high-cost, and/or chronic cases.  
• A high-risk case involves a complex or catastrophic illness or injury that requires extensive medical intervention and treatment. Often there are multiple medical problems. An example would be someone who suffered multiple broken bones and internal injuries in an accident and will require ongoing rehabilitation and staged surgeries.  
• A high-cost case requires large expenditures or extensive human and technological resources. An example would be a premature infant requiring months in a neonatal intensive care unit, home health follow-up, parental training, and frequent out-patient check-ups.  
• A chronic case involves conditions that persist for long periods or for the patient’s lifetime (such as chronic respiratory conditions). 
Some of the medical conditions for which case management may be appropriate include AIDS, stroke, burns, chronic respiratory conditions, kidney failure, amputation, cancer, neonatal complications, brain injuries, certain cardiovascular conditions, congenital defects, and spinal cord injuries.  
Case Identification 
To identify members who might be good candidates for case management, health plans examine the following factors:  
• the medical condition or diagnosis;  the type of treatment being received;  the use of prescription drugs;  the level of resource utilization (such as consultation by multiple providers); 
• the cost of care, especially when it is above a certain threshold (such as 
$25,000);  
• the length and frequency of hospital stays (hospital stays that are unusually long or multiple readmissions for the same diagnosis); and  financial, social, and psychosocial factors that may affect the member’s medical 
condition. 
After this information has been collected, it is evaluated to determine the member’s eligibility for participation in the case management program. The majority of cases are identified during utilization review, but health plans also receive referrals from providers, family members, employers, health plan personnel, and hospital utilization management or discharge planning staff. Plans can also identify cases through health risk appraisal and the analysis of utilization data.  
Assessment and Planning—The Case Manager 
A member entering a case management program is assigned a case manager, who assesses her healthcare needs and develops a plan of treatment. In doing so, he works with the member, her physician or physicians, any other relevant members of her medical team, and (if the member wishes) family members. Case managers are typically nurses but may be physicians, social workers, or other healthcare professionals. A health plan may employ case managers or contract with an outside organization. Provider groups may have their own case managers.  
The case manager is knowledgeable about medical conditions and interventions as well as the benefits of the health plan, and he tries to achieve the best possible use of the member’s coverage. Case managers are often also familiar with community resources and may recommend them to supplement or support the member’s healthcare and/or her family’s ability to care for her. Community resources may include transportation services, religious or other support groups, respite care to relieve family caregivers, and others. 
In addition to the areas of knowledge mentioned above, a case manager should be familiar with psychosocial issues; legal, regulatory, and ethical issues related to case management; and utilization review processes and techniques. They need research and analytical skills, interpersonal and communication skills, project management skills, and computer skills.  
Implementation/Monitoring and Evaluation 
During the course of treatment, the case manager works with the member’s healthcare team to coordinate and monitor services and identify the goals of planned interventions. He documents the member’s progress to determine if she is compliant with physicians’ recommendations, if the stated goals are being achieved, and if the original goals are still appropriate. As the patient’s condition evolves, new measures and approaches to care may be needed, or the care plan may need to be adjusted. During all of this, the care manager educates the member and her family. He remains in close communication with the physician in charge, who approves all care decisions.  
After case management ends, the case manager conducts a final evaluation of the effectiveness of the case management services that were provided. This evaluation focuses on quality of care, member and family satisfaction, continuity of care, and outcomes. Results of the evaluation are reported to the health plan. 
Disease Management 
Disease management (DM) (also called disease state management or population management) is a coordinated system of preventive, diagnostic, and therapeutic measures intended to provide cost-effective, quality healthcare for a patient population that has a certain chronic illness or medical condition or is at risk of developing it. DM focuses on the comprehensive management of a patient population over time rather than on individual episodes of medical care.  
One of the reasons for the development of disease management is the high level of spending on chronic diseases. Over 130 million Americans (about half of all adults) suffer from a chronic condition such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, arthritis, back pain, depression, diabetes, osteoporosis, and asthma, and this number will surely continue to grow with the aging of the population.1 The costs of the diagnosis and treatment of these conditions are enormous.  
Another factor in the growth of DM is the need to provide quality care to patients with chronic diseases. Long-term and short-term outcomes of the treatment of these diseases vary greatly, and this results, at least in part, from inconsistencies in treatment approaches from one provider to another and from one patient to another. Disease management improves the quality of care by developing a more comprehensive and uniform approach to treatment.  
One way to better understand what disease management is is to look at how it differs from traditional medical care:2 
• DM focuses on populations of patients, not individuals. 
• In DM the delivery of healthcare is highly coordinated and integrated across providers, sites, and patients. Providers work together in teams to reduce inefficiencies and fragmentation and improve the overall quality of care.  
• DM promotes standardization of care, encouraging all physicians in the program to provide the same level of care as the doctors with the best outcomes.  
• DM programs often apply business approaches such as total quality management and continuous quality improvement.  
The Application of Disease Management 
DM programs are most effective for common chronic illnesses that have variable outcomes and high costs. Specifically, DM may be indicated for medical conditions that: 
• are chronic in nature;   are likely to have high costs over time; 
• have high variability in patterns of treatment from patient to patient and physician to physician; 
• have a high rate of preventable complications, some or all of which may result in the use of more costly services such as emergency room visits and hospital readmissions;  have low rates of patient compliance with recommended treatments; 
• have optimal treatments described in the medical literature or for which evidencebased guidelines exist or can be developed; or 

• can be managed on an outpatient basis using low-technology, nonsurgical approaches that the health plan can provide. 
Disease Management and Health Plans 
DM programs were first developed in the early 1990s by pharmaceutical companies, but today many health plans have them. A plan may have its own DM program, operate one in conjunction with a drug company, or contract out to an independent DM organization. 
A health plan DM program is typically an outreach and support program for plan members with certain diseases. A plan may use medical records, referrals, or claims information to identify such members. The goal is to ensure that these people receive the most appropriate healthcare and have access to support services. Some plans’ DM programs focus on a single illness, while others address multiple illnesses. Ancillary providers, such as durable medical equipment suppliers, oxygen/respiratory therapy services, and home health agencies provide additional support to DM programs.  
Health plans may also address chronic illnesses by distributing information to members through cooperative ventures with organizations such as the American Diabetes Association or the American Lung Association. Many plans are enhancing their technical capabilities and offering online information themselves or providing links to health websites. 
Other Issues 
Clinical Practice Guidelines 
Clinical practice guidelines are an important element of utilization management, disease management, and quality management. They may include recommendations not only on the best treatment approach but also on how to implement this approach to obtain the best results. They are intended to help providers achieve the best clinical result in the most cost-effective way and to reduce the variation in treatment from one provider to another and from one patient to another. Clinical practice guidelines can be developed by a health plan itself or obtained from outside sources (as will be discussed in the module on quality management). 
A health plan typically gives providers and members information about clinical practice guidelines and how to follow them. For example, a plan’s guidelines for diabetes patients include annual glaucoma screening, so each year the plan reminds patients (by email, mail, or telephone) to schedule an eye exam, and it may also remind primary care physicians to encourage the members to have this done.  
One challenge presented by clinical practice guidelines is to make them sufficiently specific and clinical that providers can understand and follow them, yet also understandable to members. Obviously, guidelines may need to take different forms for different audiences. For example, for providers a health plan may use the clinical practice guidelines for diabetes from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, but for members it may use educational materials from the American Diabetes Association.  
Evidence-Based Healthcare 
In evidence-based healthcare the best evidence from current medical research is used in making decisions about the care of a patient. When a therapeutic intervention is being considered, the question should be asked: Does valid clinical research show that if a certain drug, therapy, surgery, etc., is used the patient’s condition will not only improve, but improve faster than if one does nothing or uses another approach? For a diagnostic test or procedure, the question is: Will the results of the test or procedure provide information that is not already known, and will the information aid the physician in selecting the appropriate treatment? 
Health Literacy 
In this module we have mentioned a number of ways in which health plan members can be involved in their healthcare and in making decisions about it—self-care, shared decision-making, disease management, and clinical practice guidelines. But to be involved in this way, and indeed even to follow instructions from healthcare providers, members must be able to understand the information and communications they receive. If they do not, they cannot really participate in their own healthcare decisions, and they may even inadvertently fail to adhere to treatment or behavioral recommendations, leading to poor health outcomes and often unnecessary healthcare expenditures. 
The issue here is health literacy, the ability to understand communications related to health and healthcare. A person may be well educated, but that does not mean she can understand a document that uses medical or legal terminology. And many people do not have much education or are not native speakers of English. To address this problem, health plans must strive to convey information to members in language the average person can understand.  
Accreditation agencies and government regulators require health plan communications with members to be written in easily understandable language. Many also have requirements for meeting the needs of non-English-speaking members. The federal 
Department of Health and Human Services has launched a National Action Plan to Improve Health Literacy, which seeks to engage organizations, professionals, policymakers, communities, individuals, and families in efforts to improve health literacy. The plan is based on the principles that everyone has the right to health information that helps them make informed decisions and that health services should be delivered in ways that are understandable and beneficial.3 
Conclusion 
Managing the utilization of healthcare services by health plan members is not just about controlling costs—it is also about improving the quality of care. By reducing both overutilization and underutilization of services, health plans can help members obtain necessary and appropriate care—the right services at the right time and at the right place.  
Utilization management benefit members in other ways as well. Preventive care programs decrease the incidence of illness or injury, facilitate early detection and treatment, and reduce the need for complex, extended care. Self-care and decision support programs give plan members greater control over their own care. Case management and disease management programs help members obtain comprehensive, high-quality, cost-effective care. 
Notes 
                                                 
1
  Center for Disease Control and Prevention. 2010. ?Chronic Diseases and Health Promotion.? www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/overview/index.htm  2  The information in this paragraph is based on: Stan Bernard MD and Donnica L. Moore MD, 
?Live Long and Prosper with Disease Management,? Managed Healthcare (Vol. 7, Number 1, January 1997): 42–43. Used with permission of the publisher. Copyright by Advanstar Communications Inc., which retains all rights to its material. 3  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 2010. National Action Plan to Improve Health Literacy. 

15 Utilization Review 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
 state the main purposes of utilization review;  describe prospective, concurrent, and retrospective UR;  list the criteria used by plans to decide which services will be subject to UR;  identify the main care settings that UR may direct members to; and  identify the main steps of the authorization process. 
In the last module we looked at the types of programs that health plans use to manage utilization of healthcare services. In this module we further explore one of these, utilization review.  
Utilization Review 
In utilization review (UR) a clinical professional working for a health plan reviews a healthcare service that another clinical professional proposes providing to a plan member or has already provided to her and makes a determination of whether that service is medically necessary and appropriate in her case and, therefore, whether the health plan will cover it. UR can be conducted before treatment begins (prospective review), while it is in progress (concurrent review), or after it ends (retrospective review). It is used most often for hospital admissions but also for some outpatient services. 
UR commonly involves authorization—a member or provider submits a request to the plan for a proposed service, and the plan’s UR staff make a determination of whether it will be covered. UR also involves the collection of information and data that a plan uses not only to make particular authorization decisions but also to monitor utilization and promote quality and cost-effective care.  
It should be noted that utilization review may be conducted by entities other than health plans. When a medical group provides healthcare services to the members of a health plan and is compensated by the plan by capitation, the group bears the financial risk for high utilization of services. Therefore, to manage utilization the group may design and operate its own UR and authorization system. However, the group typically provides utilization data to the plan so that it can exercise oversight and guard against underutilization. 
The Purposes of UR 
Utilization review and authorization have three main functions in a health plan.  
• Authorization helps ensure that benefits are paid correctly.  
• Quality and cost-effectiveness are promoted, in part through clinical practice guidelines.  
• Information and data collected is used for utilization management and other purposes.  
Benefit Payment 
A health plan authorizes payment for a healthcare service only if it is: 
• covered by the plan and  medically necessary and appropriate. 
Whether a service is covered of course depends on the health plan’s benefit structure and the language of the insurance contract, and this may be determined by nonclinical employees. 
Clinical staff (usually physicians) make decisions about medical necessity and appropriateness. A healthcare service is considered medically necessary if it provided by a physician or other healthcare provider in order to identify or treat an illness or injury and is: 
• consistent with the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of the member’s condition;   in accordance with the standards of good medical practice;  not solely for the convenience of the member, member’s family, physician, or other healthcare provider; and 
• furnished in the least intensive type of medical care setting required by the member’s condition.1 
A service is appropriate if the expected health benefits exceed the risks by a margin wide enough to justify the service.2 
It is important to clarify that in UR health plan staff make a determination of whether the plan will pay for a service, not whether the member may receive the service. If payment is not authorized for a service, because it is not covered or not considered medically necessary and appropriate, the member may obtain it by paying for it herself. For instance, a person might at her own expense have cosmetic surgery or undergo a treatment that is experimental and of unproven effectiveness and safety. 
Quality and Cost-Effectiveness 
Authorization decisions are made by physicians familiar with a wide range of treatment options. As part of the authorization process, these doctors can direct members to the treatments most likely to produce the best outcomes and to the most appropriate providers and care settings, thereby promoting quality and cost-effective care.  
UR staff also improve quality and cost-effectiveness by using clinical practice guidelines to reduce inappropriate variations in provider practice. Many physicians have busy schedules and find it difficult to stay abreast of the current research on all the conditions they treat, and consequently they sometimes the lack the information they need to choose the optimum treatment for a patient. Health plans can support doctors in this area by adopting clinical practice guidelines based on medical research and community standards of medical care, making UR decisions based on these guidelines, and educating physicians about them. In this way unnecessary and ineffective practices can be identified and reduced. 
However, it should be clarified that the goal of UR and clinical practice guidelines is not to eliminate all variation and completely standardize medical care. Some variation is a normal and necessary feature of high-quality care—a doctor’s practice may diverge from the norm in a particular case because of such factors as an allergy to the standard medication or a patient’s own decisions based on her quality of life.  
UR Data  
A great deal of information and data are collected by UR programs and used for a variety of purposes. UR data can show patterns in the utilization of services and areas that may need more utilization management because overutilization or underutilization. For instance, there may be numerous referrals to orthopedic surgeons for uncomplicated lower back pain that can by treated by PCPs with medication and exercise or by physical therapists or chiropractors, indicating that a stricter authorization process may be needed. Or data may reveal that a high percentage of members with diabetes have not been referred to a dietitian, and better education of PCPs may be needed. 
UR data have many other uses. They can be used to evaluate overall network performance or to profile an individual provider’s practice patterns. A plan can determine if it needs more or fewer specialists by considering members’ utilization of different specialty services. Diagnostic and treatment information can be provided to a plan’s claims processing systems to detect possible errors. And UR data are used to comply with internal and external reporting requirements, including those related to accreditation. 
Among the most common utilization measures used in UR are hospitalizations per member per year, hospital bed days per admission, hospital bed days per member, hospital bed days per 1,000 members, specialist encounters per member, authorizations or referrals per PCP per 100 encounters, and authorizations or referrals per 1,000 members per year. 
Types of Utilization Review 
Prospective Review 
Prospective review takes place before a service is provided. It is generally preferable to retrospective review because the member, the doctor, and the plan can reach an understanding before treatment begins about which treatment alternatives and care settings are appropriate, and because the plan can make clear before any expenses are incurred what will be covered and what will not. 
Prospective UR typically involves precertification (prior authorization). If a certain service is proposed, the member or the physician in charge of his care (often his PCP) is required to request authorization of payment beforehand. The UR staff evaluates the request and approves it; or suggests an alternative treatment, provider, or setting; or denies it. In making this decision, UR staff consider a range of alternatives and, using clinical practice guidelines and other established standards of care while taking into account the particular circumstances of the case, determine which of those alternatives is likely to have the best outcome and be the most cost-effective. 
Precertification is normally required for a hospital admission and for some outpatient services such as complex diagnostic tests. In some plans a PCP must obtain an authorization to refer a member to a specialist for treatment.  
Precertification Tools 
A number of tools are used by UR staff in making precertification decisions:  
 Utilization guidelines (such as clinical practice guidelines) indicate accepted treatments for common medical conditions, based on medical research and established standards of care. 
 	Experience-based criteria incorporate generally accepted community standards of practice and the experience and expert opinion of medical directors and other healthcare providers. They are used when medical research is not available. 
 Site appropriateness listings indicate the most appropriate settings for common procedures. Many surgical procedures that were once performed only in a hospital are now routinely done on an outpatient basis.  
 Length-of-stay (LOS) guidelines indicate the average number of days a patient stays in a hospital or other facility based diagnosis, the severity of the condition, and the type of services and procedures prescribed.  
Hospitalization 
If UR staff approve a hospitalization, they determine the expected length of stay; confirm that all parties are aware of the plan’s preadmission testing policies, and begin the process of discharge planning.  
• Preadmission testing policies require members to have tests needed before a procedure (such as X-rays and laboratory tests) done on an outpatient basis 
before entering the hospital. Otherwise a member may be admitted, have a test result that requires postponing the procedure, and be discharged, resulting in an unnecessary stay. Preadmission testing also allows a member to be admitted on the day the procedure is performed instead of earlier, shortening his stay. 
• Discharge planning addresses what will happen when a patient leaves the hospital. During prospective UR, discharge planning typically involves determining what treatments and services should be completed before the member is discharged, where he will go (for instance, to his home or to a skilled nursing facility), and what equipment and services he may need there (such as a wheelchair or home healthcare). It may also identify members who could benefit from case management and disease management and have these services in place by the time they are discharged. 
Concurrent Review 
Concurrent review takes place while treatment is in progress. It is typically used for a long hospital stay and for outpatient services that continue over a considerable time, such as chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy; physical, occupational, and/or speech therapy; home health care; and counseling. 
Concurrent UR involves tracking a patient’s progress and any complications, directing him to appropriate and cost-effective services, and updating goals. UR staff may evaluate and authorize in advance requests for additional services (that is, grant prior authorization) and help direct the course of care by recommending that the patient receive a different level of care or move to a different care setting. For inpatient hospital care, a UR nurse gathers information about the patient’s progress, tracks the total length and cost of care, and continues discharge planning. 
Retrospective Review 
Retrospective review is performed after treatment has been completed. In some cases such as emergency care, there may be an immediate retrospective review of the medical necessity and appropriateness of services provided to a member. But more typically, retrospective review consists of an analysis of claims data and medical records.  
Retrospective UR obviously cannot direct the course of care, but it enables a health plan to identify areas where utilization can be improved. For instance, a retrospective analysis of provider practice patterns might reveal that certain specialists prescribe expensive drugs when comparable outcomes can be achieved using less costly alternatives. It might show many hospital admissions of diabetic patients, indicating the need for more member education. It might identify the inappropriate use of services, which exposes members to health risks and adds to costs. In such cases, UR staff can identify providers whose practice patterns fall outside the norm, discuss their utilization criteria with them, and thereby improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of care. 
Billing Errors and Fraud 
Retrospective review of claims data can also reveal billing errors and sometimes even fraud. Such cases often involve billing codes, numerical codes that correspond to medical services or procedures and that providers use in submitting bills. Honest coding errors often occur—a provider inadvertently uses the wrong code for a service, resulting in a payment that is too high or too low. But in some cases a provider may engage in fraudulent billing schemes, such as upcoding and unbundling. 
• Upcoding is deliberately using the code for a service that is similar or related to the service actually provided but is more expensive. For instance, a doctor might submit a claim using the code for an office visit, when in fact he merely spoke to the patient over the telephone.  
• Unbundling is the submission of separate claims for services that should be billed together as one combined service. Health plans require that certain related services, or certain services performed at the same time, be billed together as a combined service, using one billing code. By unbundling, the provider receives more in total fees than he would have received had the claims been properly submitted as one. For example, instead of submitting a single claim for multiple tests performed at the same time, a laboratory bills each test separately and improperly receives a greater payment. 
Software can be used to analyze claims data and indentify inconsistencies and patterns that may indicate errors or billing schemes. When fraud is suspected, the case is normally turned over to the plan’s special investigations unit. 
Services Subject to UR 
Health plans cover a very large number of healthcare services, and it would be impossible to apply UR to all of them. And even if it were feasible, it would not be desirable, as UR is not worthwhile or cost-effective for many services. How many services is UR used for, and which ones? This varies by plan, and it depends on a plan’s size, structure, and level of management control. The following factors are taken into account: 
 access requirements,   frequency of utilization,  cost and risk,  total expenditures,  level of inappropriate utilization, and  cost of review. 
Access Requirements 
In all types of health plans, members can directly access their primary care providers (PCPs)—they do not need a referral from anyone or authorization from the plan for an office visit. In most plans members can also directly access certain nonprimary care such as obstetrics/gynecology (OB/GYN), pediatrics, and dental and vision care. Some plans allow a member with a serious chronic condition (such as AIDS, diabetes, advanced rheumatoid arthritis, and congestive heart failure) to select a specialist as her PCP, so that referral or authorization is not required to see the specialist. Some states also require direct access to chiropractics and other forms of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM). For other types of nonprimary care, members may be required to obtain a referral from their PCP or authorization from the plan. 
Frequency of Utilization 
Some services are performed so frequently and consistently that they are considered part of a provider’s normal practice. For example, PCPs routinely have certain laboratory tests done in conjunction with annual physical examinations, OB/GYN specialists routinely order Pap tests as part of a gynecological examination, and cardiologists routinely administer electrocardiograms (EKGs) during regular office visits. Authorization and utilization review is typically not required for these services.  
On the other hand, procedures that are not routine usually require authorization and UR. 
For example, a PCP would typically be free to order X-rays of a member’s broken leg but would have to obtain authorization for an MRI study, and a cardiologist could administer an EKG as part of a regular office visit but would probably need authorization for an echocardiogram. 
Cost and Risk of a Service 
Low-cost, low-risk services generally do not require authorization and UR, while highcost or high-risk procedures and treatments generally do. Authorization is also typically required for services that are not widely accepted as effective, are being proposed before trying less costly or more conservative treatment, or must be performed by a noncontracted provider. 
Total Expenditures on a Service 
In addition to the cost of a service, the total amount the plan spends on that service in a year is an important consideration. A low-cost service can have a high total cost for a plan if it is provided frequently. For instance, physical therapy costs less than many healthcare services, but many members receive it the plan’s total expenditures on it might be considerable, making authorization and UR desirable. 
Level of Inappropriate Utilization 
If authorization is frequently denied for a service, this may be an indication that the service is often used inappropriately. Therefore the higher the denial rate for a service, the more likely the service will require authorization and UR.  
Cost of Review 
UR takes time and resources, and another consideration in deciding whether a service should be subject to UR is whether the savings realized or the improvement in quality of care justify the costs of conducting UR. Plans must periodically review the services covered by their UR programs in terms of value and cost-effectiveness and eliminate unnecessary or ineffective requirements, especially for frequently used services. In many plans most PCP requests for authorization for nonprimary care services are approved, indicating that PCPs are adequately managing utilization of these services, and in this case UR is an unnecessary cost for the plan and an unnecessary administrative burden for PCPs. Many plans also allow specialists to perform certain services without authorization because the cost savings of UR do not outweigh the cost of performing it.  
Care Settings 
One of the primary purposes of both prospective and concurrent UR is to determine the setting of care (level of care) most appropriate for a patient. Acute care facilities such as hospitals are necessary for severe medical problems that require around-the-clock intensive treatment by healthcare professionals. But they are not always appropriate for patients who need immediate evaluation and treatment, which can often be provided more effectively in emergency departments, urgent care centers, and observation care units. And for those recovering from an acute illness or injury, continued care can often be delivered more cost-effectively in alternative settings such as subacute care facilities, step-down units, or patients’ homes, rather than in a hospital. 
Emergency Departments 
Sometimes the immediate diagnosis and treatment of a severe injury or critical illness is needed, and this is usually best provided by an emergency department (ED), such as the emergency room of a hospital. 
On one hand, health plans encourage members to use EDs when necessary, as this can both improve outcomes for the member and reduce the long-term utilization of resources. For example, emergency treatment for a patient suffering a severe asthma attack can often reduce the length of subsequent inpatient care or even eliminate the need for hospitalization.  
On the other hand, a plan can incur high costs when members use EDs unnecessarily or inappropriately, as when a member repeatedly goes to an emergency room when he really should make an appointment with his PCP. In response to this problem, plans often require members or providers to obtain authorization for an ED visit within 24 hours after treatment, and if this is not done benefits may be denied or reduced. Some plans also conduct a retrospective review of ED claims and may deny payment if it is determined that emergency care was not really needed. 
However, some states prohibit health plans from requiring authorization for emergency services. And many states require plans to use the prudent layperson’s standard in determining whether emergency care was appropriate and should be paid for, and most plans have adopted this standard. This means that a condition is considered a legitimate emergency if a prudent layperson (a person with an average knowledge of health and medicine) could reasonably expect the absence of immediate medical attention to put her health in jeopardy. It should be clarified that the prudent layperson’s standard is based on the symptoms that lead a person to seek emergency care, not her eventual diagnosis. For example, it is considered reasonable for a person with severe chest pain to think he may be having a heart attack and go to an ED, even if it turns out to be only severe indigestion. 
Urgent Care Centers 
People with injuries or illnesses that require immediate attention but are not a serious threat to their health or life, such as cuts, sprains, or fevers, may best be treated in an urgent care center. Some centers are located in or near hospital EDs, which refer patients to them, while others are free-standing. Although the cost of care in an urgent care center is generally higher than in a physician’s office, it is lower than in a hospital ED, so many health plans cover it. But other plans do not—they require emergency care to be delivered in an ED and all other care to be coordinated by the member’s PCP. 
Observation Care Units 
Hospital observation care units are for patients who have conditions requiring continuous monitoring but who do not currently need either emergency interventions or acute care. Examples include women with symptoms of pre-term labor, diabetic patients waiting for glucose levels to stabilize following treatment for an acute episode, and people with cardiac irregularities who are waiting for test results. Most patients directed to hospital observation care units have a reasonable chance of stabilizing and being released to a non-acute care setting within 24 hours. Those patients whose conditions do not resolve satisfactorily in the observation unit can be admitted for inpatient care. The facilities, equipment, and staffing requirements for observation care units are much less costly than for emergency departments, so their use can result in lower costs for a health plan. 
Subacute Care Facilities 
Subacute care facilities provide the continuing care needed by people who are too sick to be cared for at home but do not need the intensive treatment and supervision of a hospital. These facilities typically provide 24-hour professional nursing care, physician direction and contact, and extensive ancillary and rehabilitative services (such as physical therapy). The goal is to optimize the patient’s medical condition and functional ability so that she can be sent home or to a lower level of care. 
Step-Down Units 
A step-down unit is a section of a hospital that provides subacute care to patients following a period of acute care. They provide the same services as stand-alone subacute care facilities and are an alternative to them (and are more convenient for physicians and UR nurses). There are also step-down units that provide an intermediate level of care between a critical care unit and a regular nursing unit of a hospital. For example, a heart attack patient who no longer needs the services of a critical care unit but who still needs more monitoring than patients on a regular nursing unit may be transferred to such a step-down unit. Because step-down units use fewer medical resources than higher levels of care, the cost is generally lower. 
Home Healthcare 
Home healthcare is for people who need some nursing care, therapy, or assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs) such as bathing, dressing, and getting around their homes, but who generally do not need 24-hour care. Most of those receiving home healthcare are elderly or disabled people who have an ongoing need for help with ADLs because of a chronic physical impairment or supervision because of a cognitive disorder such as Alzheimer’s disease, and health plans do not cover such care. (Long-term care 

insurance does.) But health plans do cover home healthcare for members who need it for a limited time (such as a few weeks) while they are recovering from an acute illness or injury. Services include basic nursing care, wound care, administering of medications, help with ADLs, and therapy and rehabilitation. Durable medical equipment (such as walkers and wheelchairs) may be provided, and in some cases a nonprofessional home health aide may prepare meals and do housekeeping and laundry. 
Hospice Care 
Hospice care consists of services and support for the dying and their families. The purpose is not primarily to treat the medical condition of the patient, which is incurable, but rather to improve the quality of life for the time that remains. Care focuses on pain and symptom management, social services, and emotional and spiritual support for the individual and family members. Hospice care may be provided in the patient’s home or in a facility. Care is provided by a team that includes nurses, home health aides, social workers, therapists, chaplains, and bereavement counselors. Volunteers are also involved.  
Most health plans that cover hospice care model their coverage on Medicare, specifying that benefits are available only to those who have a life expectancy of six months or less and have agreed to forego medical or surgical interventions that prolong life and receive only healthcare services that support comfort. 
The Authorization/UR Process 
The authorization/utilization review process consists of a series of steps, described below. 
Data Collection 
In prospective review, information is obtained about the member’s condition and the proposed treatment, for use in making the authorization (precertification) decision. 
During concurrent review, information is needed to monitor the member’s progress and treatment and direct him to the best care options. For retrospective UR, a variety of data on utilization, outcomes, and costs are collected. Information and data can be obtained from members, physicians, hospital records, other providers, encounter reports, and claim forms.  
Data Transmittal 
Information for UR may be transmitted to the health plan manually, telephonically, or electronically.  
Manual (Paper) Transmittal 
A provider may complete a paper authorization form and send it to the health plan, and plan employees then enter the information into the computer system. Manual transmittal has a high degree of physician acceptance, as paperwork can generally be completed at the physician’s convenience, without intruding into busy office hours or disrupting patient care. 
Telephone Transmittal 
In telephone transmittal providers call a central number and either speak to a plan employee or report information to an interactive voice response (IVR) system. For doctors, a well-designed telephone system is faster, less cumbersome, and less laborintensive than paper transmittal. But poorly structured systems can result in long delays and unnecessary repetition, especially when telephones are busy or operators put providers on hold. For example, in systems with multiple levels of input, a clerk may ask for demographic information and then transfer the provider to a nurse or physician who collects clinical information. The provider is often put on hold during each transfer. In addition, if information is not carried forward, it must be repeated at each level.  
For the health plan, telephone transmittal is often more accurate and complete than manual transmittal. Providers are less likely to omit necessary information when dealing with a service representative or following instructions on automated systems. Telephone transmittal also reduces data entry errors because data are entered only once (either directly by the provider through an IVR system or by plan personnel). 
Electronic Transmittal 
Electronic systems allow providers to transmit UR information through computers linked to the health plan’s network (intranet) or over the Internet. Electronic transmittal is generally faster, less labor-intensive, and more complete than other transmittal methods, and because it has less opportunity for human error (such as data entry errors), it also tends to be more accurate. However, electronic transmittal of healthcare information is subject to more stringent regulatory requirements than other methods. For example, HIPAA includes extensive guidelines related to electronic transmittal of personal and protected health information. 
Data Evaluation and Decisions 
The data evaluation and decision-making stage of authorization and UR consists of two components, an administrative review and a clinical review.  
Administrative Review 
Administrative review addresses coverage issues: Basically, is the patient covered by the plan, and is the proposed service covered by the patient’s benefit package? If the answer is no, authorization is denied and no further evaluation is necessary. For example, authorization is denied during administrative review if the proposed service is specifically excluded under the benefit plan (for instance, cosmetic surgery or experimental procedures). In some plans administrative review is conducted by employees who are not medical professionals, while in others it is performed by UR staff. 
Medical Review 
If the patient and proposed service are covered, a medical review is conducted—a medical professional (usually a nurse or physician) evaluates the medical necessity and appropriateness of the proposed service. Typically, nurses only have the authority to approve authorization requests that meet certain criteria; the decision to deny authorization based on medical necessity or appropriateness must be made by a physician. Medical review may result in authorization, modified authorization, pended authorization, or denial. 
• If the service is deemed necessary and appropriate, authorization is granted (payment is approved). 
• In some cases UR staff grant modified authorization—they do not approve the service exactly as proposed, but rather with some change. For example, they may approve payment for a wheelchair but require that it be bought from a company contracted with the plan. UR staff may approve an alternative treatment (such as a different drug, provider, or diagnostic test), but only after consulting with the treating physician and reaching consensus on the decision. 
• If UR staff question the necessity or appropriateness of a proposed service, there may be a “pended” authorization—action is delayed while the case is submitted for additional review to the plan’s medical director, UM committee, or expert consultants. Additional information may be requested from the physician. 
• If a service is clearly not medically necessary or appropriate, authorization of payment is denied. However, plans evaluate cases carefully before denying payment, as denials may result in member dissatisfaction, appeals, and even legal action.  
It should be clarified and emphasized again that UR staff do not determine what services a member may receive, only what the health plan will pay for. 
The Scope of Authorizations 
An authorization may vary in terms of the services or time it covers.  
 	Single-visit authorization. Health plans sometimes require PCPs and other gatekeepers to submit a separate authorization request for each specialist visit or nonprimary procedure. Additional visits or services are not covered without an additional authorization. This approach provides a high level of management, but it difficult to implement and enforce, and providers find it onerous.  
 Limited-visit authorization. Under this approach, a single authorization covers a certain number of specialist visits or treatment for a certain amount of time. For visits or services beyond these limits, an additional authorization must be obtained. 
 Prohibition of secondary referrals. In most cases, only a PCP or other gatekeeper can give referrals for nonprimary care; specialists (unless they serve as gatekeepers) cannot make referrals without plan authorization. For example, a PCP refers a member to a specialist for a certain treatment. If the specialist decides the member needs additional visits, different treatment, or the care of a different specialist, the specialist cannot authorize this; PCP must make an additional request for authorization. 
 Inpatient care authorization. For inpatient care in a hospital or other facility, health plans often allow authorization for one service or procedure to cover related services. For example, authorization of a surgical procedure may cover services related to the surgery, such as preoperative testing, radiology, anesthesia, and postoperative follow-up care. In most inpatient situations, extension of an authorization by means of concurrent review is a more efficient and effective way to manage complex cases than requiring a new authorization request.  
Utilization review is based on the individual needs and circumstances of patients, and under each of the above approaches exceptions may be made for conditions that require multiple visits, specialists, or therapy options (such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy, mental health and substance abuse treatment, and obstetrics). In these cases the scope and duration of services are typically determined by the specialist. 
Authorization requirements, including limits and exceptions, should be clearly identified in the health plan’s UM program and communicated to members and providers. 
Notes 
                                                 
1
  W. Clark. 1995. “Negotiating Successful Health Plan Contracts,” Healthcare Financial Management (August 1995): 28. 2  Mark A. Shuster MD, Elizabeth A. McGlynn, and Robert H. Brook MD. 1997. “Why the Quality of U.S. Health Care Must Be Improved,” National Coalition on Health Care, October 1997. 

16 Quality Assessment and Improvement 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• discuss the issue of patient safety, 
• define and give examples of the three main types of quality measures and state the advantages and disadvantages of each, 
• identify the three main categories of data that health plans use to assess quality, and  describe four approaches to improving health plan quality.  
Utilizing healthcare resources efficiently is an important objective of healthcare management, but equally important is ensuring that health plan members receive highquality care and service. In this module we describe how health plans use quality management (QM) to establish goals for quality, measure and monitor performance, and make improvements. In the following module we examine in more detail quality measures, standards, and accreditation. 
We begin with a brief overview of the nature and importance of quality in health plans. We then describe the activities that make up QM. Although QM is a continuous process that consists of a variety of interrelated activities, for the purposes of our discussion we divide it into two broad categories: 
• Quality assessment includes activities designed to define and measure quality and performance and identify any need for change.  
• Quality improvement involves planning and implementing changes and then reapplying quality assessment techniques to assess the impact of those changes on outcomes.  Quality 
What Is Quality? 
Although there is a consensus that quality is an essential goal in healthcare, there are many different ideas about how to define quality, how to recognize it, and how to provide it. In its most general sense, the term quality in the context of a health plan refers to the plan’s success in providing healthcare and other services in such a way that plan members’ needs and expectations are met.  
Two Types of Health Plan Quality 
There are two broad categories of quality in a health plan:  
• Service quality generally refers to a health plan’s success in meeting the needs and expectations of plan members with regard to nonclinical (nonmedical) customer services. It has to do with such matters as how well member services representatives answer member’s questions and resolve administrative issues, how long a member has to wait for a response to a complaint, or how friendly and helpful provider office staff are.  
• Healthcare quality. According to an often quoted definition formulated by the Institute of Medicine, healthcare quality is “the degree to which health services for individuals and populations increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes and are consistent with current professional knowledge.” In common language, healthcare quality refers to whether health plan members receive care based on the most up-to-date and effective medical practices and their medical conditions are successfully cured or managed. 
Why Is Quality Important? 
The mission of a health plan is to provide top-quality healthcare at an affordable price. Therefore, the most straightforward answer to the question, “Why is quality so important for health plans?” is that quality is a major part of a plan’s reason for being. A health plan’s purpose is to, as effectively as possible, maintain and restore members’ health while protecting their safety—in other words, offer quality care. 
There are also good business reasons for a health plan to provide quality and make known that it does so. For many consumers, employers, and other purchasers, quality is an important factor in choosing a health plan, and the ability to demonstrate superior quality gives a health plan a competitive advantage.  
Another issue is that, because managed care plans have been in the forefront of efforts to hold down healthcare costs, some people have expressed concerns that they have compromised on quality. This is not the case, as many studies show that the quality of care provided by managed care plans equals or exceeds that of traditional fee-forservice insurance.1 But health plans may need to demonstrate quality to dispel such doubts and earn the public’s confidence.  
Patient Safety 
One of the most important reasons to promote healthcare quality is to ensure patient safety and reduce healthcare (medical) errors. The National Patient Safety Foundation defines patient safety as “the prevention of healthcare errors and the elimination or mitigation of patient injury caused by healthcare errors”; with a healthcare (medical) error defined as “an unintended healthcare outcome caused by a defect in the delivery of care to a patient.”2 
Research has documented an alarming incidence and severity of medical errors and adverse events (instances of patient harm) caused by them. In 1999 the Institute of Medicine (IOM) published a landmark study that is widely cited; it estimated that nearly 100,000 Americans die in hospitals each year as a result of medical errors.3 More recently (in 2006) IOM issued a report on preventable adverse drug events, which estimated that in one year there were 380,000-450,000 such events in hospitals, 800,000 in long-term care facilities, and 530,000 among outpatient Medicare patients.4  
These large numbers represent people whose physical wellbeing or even lives were put at risk, and who may have undergone unnecessary suffering. It should also be noted that medical errors add to the cost of healthcare, as they can worsen patients’ conditions and lead to the need for additional treatment. The 1999 IOM study estimated the annual cost of medical errors at between $17 and $29 billion.5 
Medical Errors 
What exactly are medical errors? 
• An error of commission is doing the wrong thing. A wrong treatment or procedure is performed, as when the wrong medication is administered.  
• An error of omission is not doing the right thing. A patient does not receive the appropriate test or treatment, or does not receive it in a timely manner.  
• An error of execution is doing the right thing in the wrong way. A planned treatment or procedure is delivered incorrectly, as when a mistake is made in a surgical operation.  
• An adverse event is any harm a patient suffers that is caused by something other than her underlying condition. The cause might be a medical error, some other deficiency in the patient’s care, or something else. 
A federal Quality Interagency Coordination (QuIC) Task Force, expanding on an earlier IOM definition, defined a medical error as: "the failure of a planned action to be completed as intended or the use of a wrong plan to achieve an aim. Errors can include problems in practice, products, procedures, and systems. A useful, brief definition of a medical error is that it is a preventable adverse event.”6 
The Causes of Medical Errors 
Medical errors have a number of causes. In some cases an individual practitioner makes a mistake, but more often there is some breakdown in the healthcare system.  
• Lack of communication. Communication among healthcare providers is often limited or faulty, and this is the cause of many errors. To give a simple but frequent occurrence, doctors often write illegible prescriptions leading to incorrect medications, or illegible orders resulting in inappropriate procedures. Another example: an outpatient diagnostic center fails to call a physician about a patient’s chest x-ray showing pneumonia, and as a result the patient does not receive timely treatment for the pneumonia and has to be hospitalized. The problem of poor communication is compounded by the large numbers of people who may participate in a patient’s care. 

Lack of reporting. Most healthcare organizations have internal systems for reporting such incidents as adverse drug interactions and minor medical errors, and federal law requires that adverse drug reactions be reported to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). But compliance with these requirements is often very low, and incidents frequently go unreported. And without adequate reporting, plans often cannot identify the causes of medical errors or develop effective strategies to prevent them. 
• Lack of verification. Many treatment decisions are based on one individual analysis of test results, without secondary verification, and studies have shown that the error rates in such cases are high. 
One problem that is being addressed is the lack of coordination among parties concerned with medical errors. The National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) and Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank (HIPDB) were established to centralize healthcare quality reporting in relation to practitioners. State licensing agencies, health plans, malpractice insurance carriers, criminal courts, and others are required to report quality of care incidences to these databases, subject to very high fines. The databases also notify practitioners and state licensing entities whenever a report is received about a practitioner, allowing the licensing entity to conduct a further investigation when indicated, as in the case of a criminal conviction or malpractice claim. Health plans may also query these databases when a practitioner’s applies to participate, as can hospitals and medical groups reviewing an application for staff privileges. The national databases have significantly reduced the ability of a poor-quality practitioner to move from one state to another without the new state’s licensing board being aware of prior issues. It has been recommended that an even more comprehensive nationwide mandatory system of collecting, analyzing, and reporting standardized information about medical errors that result in death or serious harm be established, but this has not yet been done. 
Addressing Patient Safety 
Healthcare providers, health plans, and other entities have taken a number of steps to ensure patient safety and reduce medical errors. 
• Medical error reporting systems allow healthcare providers and facilities to analyze common errors and identify aspects of the healthcare delivery process that result in such errors.  
• Medical alert systems apply preprogrammed criteria to identify test results that fall outside acceptable ranges.  
• Drug checking systems link physician and pharmacy order entry information systems and automatically alert physicians and pharmacists of possible drug interactions or allergic reactions to a prescribed drug.  
• Electronic medical record systems allow providers and health plans to track and analyze clinical data and provide reminders for needed services. 
 
Assessing Quality in a Health Plan 
Recognizing that quality is important is easy. But as we will see in this section, it is a more complex task for a health plan to define precisely what quality is in certain contexts and, based on that definition, determine whether the plan is delivering quality. Performance measurement can help a health plan determine how well it is doing in meeting members’ needs and can provide information the plan needs to improve its performance and effectively allocate resources.  
The Issue of Perception  
Plan members’ perceptions of healthcare quality may differ from objective, scientific criteria. 
Example: A health plan contracts with a medical group because the group’s physicians have strong credentials and are recognized as experts in their fields. A plan member visits one of these physicians and feels that she is unfriendly, and the member does not understand her explanation of his illness or her plan for treatment. 
But he undergoes the treatment and gets better. Objectively, based on the provider’s qualifications, the treatment delivered, and the results, the member received highquality care. But he may not think so. 
Consumer perception and medical science may even conflict. 
Example: A member is dissatisfied with her doctor because he refuses to prescribe an antibiotic for her sore throat. But in fact the antibiotic is not necessary or useful for her ailment. Moreover, the overprescribing of antibiotics for viral infections of the throat and respiratory tract has not only increased healthcare expenditures unnecessarily but led to the growth of antibiotic resistant organisms.  
While science and objective criteria take priority, consumer perceptions are also important. They may reflect important aspects of care, such as a doctor’s communication skills. And purchasers base their decisions about health plans in part on the perceptions of the consumers they represent. Consequently, as we will see, while many quality measures are based on scientific criteria, others reflect the perceptions of members.  
Quality Measures  
Measures of quality are generally divided into three categories.  
• Structure measures relate to the nature, quantity, and quality of the resources that a health plan has available for member service and patient care. For instance, a health plan might calculate how many dermatologists it has per 1,000 members, or what percentage of its physicians are board-certified. 
• Process measures relate to the methods and procedures a health plan and its providers use to furnish service and care. A plan might calculate what percentage of members received regular check-ups over a certain period, or how often a certain medication was not prescribed when it should have been. 
Outcomes measures gauge the extent to which services succeed in improving or maintaining patient health. A plan might calculate the percentage of patients with a certain condition who are still alive five years later. 
Most of the measures currently used to evaluate health plan quality are structure and process measures, but the trend is toward greater use of outcomes measures.  
Structure, process, and outcomes are interdependent. Structure and process lead or are believed to lead to better outcomes, and the best structure and process measures are those that can be explicitly linked to improved outcomes. Conversely, outcomes are the results of structure and process, and the most useful outcomes measures are those that can be related to specific processes or structures. If health plans can link outcomes to processes or structures, they will have a better idea of which processes or structures to improve and how to improve them, and can thereby improve patient health outcomes.  
Assessing Service Quality 
As noted, the term “service quality” is used for nonclinical (nonmedical) services. It involves the customer service that health plan members receive both from the plan’s own staff and from its providers.  
Health Plan Staff 
The quality of the service delivered by health plan staff includes: 
• how long a member has to wait for an answer when calling the plan;  the attitude, competence, and efficiency of the member services staff;  how quickly member services representatives can resolve issues for members;  the accuracy and timeliness of claims payments;  the availability and understandability of educational materials for members; and 
• the clarity and accuracy of materials explaining to members benefits, limitations, and administrative processes.  
Health plans can use the three types of measures discussed above to assess service quality. 
• structure measures, such as the number of customer service representatives available; 
• process measures, such as the average wait time when members call or the average claim processing time; and 
• outcomes measures, such as the rate of errors in claims payment or responses to member satisfaction surveys.  
In using these measures, a health plan can compare its performance to established standards and/or its own previous performance. 
Healthcare Providers 
For healthcare providers, service quality includes: 
• how easily members can get through to a doctor’s office by phone;  how long members wait for an appointment;  how long members wait in the office before seeing the doctor;  the attitude, competence, and efficiency of office staff; 
• the doctor’s “bedside manner.” This includes how friendly and understanding the doctor is, how well she explains clinical findings and treatment options, whether the patient feels that she listens to his concerns, etc.). 
Provider service quality can also be assessed by means of structure measures (such as the number of primary care physicians), process measures (average wait time for an appointment), and outcomes measures (results of member surveys). 
Assessing Healthcare Quality  
Healthcare quality typically refers to: 
• patient safety (as defined above); 
• practices consistent with current clinical or scientific knowledge, best practices, and professionally recognized standards of care; and  care delivered in a timely manner to avoid harmful delays; and  care respectful of and responsive to patient needs, preferences, and values. 
Structure Measures 
Structure measures of healthcare quality include: 
• the number of primary care providers in the plan’s network,  the number of specialists,  the number of providers accepting new patients,  the geographic distribution of providers within the service area,   the percentage of providers who are board-certified,  physician turnover in the plan, 
   hospitals in the plan’s network,   the number of hospital beds,   emergency room access, and   the availability of member education programs.  
The advantage of structure measures is that they are relatively easy to calculate and report. The problem with them is that there is little research specifically supporting a link between them and high-quality outcomes. However, it does seem highly probable that many structure measures are related to quality. For instance, other things being equal, a health plan with more board-certified physicians very likely provides higher quality care, on average, than a plan with fewer board-certified physicians. Likewise, it seems clear that if so few doctors are available that members have to wait a very long time for an appointment, healthcare outcomes will be adversely affected. 
Process Measures 
Among the most popular process measures are preventive care statistics. They are relatively easy to calculate and understand, and they fit well with the current emphasis on prevention. Examples include: 
• the percentage of children receiving immunizations; 
• the percentage of adults (particularly the elderly) receiving regular medical checkups;  
• the percentage of members receiving certain screenings, such as mammograms, pap smears, or cholesterol screening; and 
• the percentage of members receiving advice on smoking cessation or other riskreducing programs. 
Health plans also use various process measures related to how providers treat patients. One important element is appropriateness of care—appropriate care can improve health outcomes and increase member satisfaction, while inappropriate care can lead not only to poor outcomes but to adverse events. In general, inappropriate care can be divided into three categories:  
• Overuse of care is unnecessary tests, medications, or procedures. Overuse of care not only wastes resources and increases costs, it can reduce the effectiveness of appropriate treatments and expose the patient to unnecessary risks and possible adverse effects. 
• Underuse of care occurs when a provider fails to render a service or treatment that would likely improve the patient’s health (an error of omission). For example, despite evidence of their benefits, beta blockers are not always routinely administered to patients following a heart attack. 
• Misuse of care occurs when the wrong treatment is provided (an error of commission) or when the correct treatment is delivered incorrectly (an error of execution). 
In many cases appropriate care is codified as professionally recognized standards of care. A standard of care is a diagnostic and treatment process that a provider should follow for a certain type of patient, illness, or clinical circumstance. Standards of care are generally published by medical organizations such as the American Medical Association (AMA) and others. 
The advantage of process measures is the same as for structure measures—they are relatively easy to determine and report. But while links have been established between some process measures and positive health outcomes, for others they have not.  
Outcomes Measures 
Outcomes measures can be divided into three types: clinical status, functional status, and patient perception. 
• Clinical status relates to biological health outcomes, either for an individual or for a population served, such as the following: 
o the change in tumor size for patients treated for cancer, 
o the five-year survival rate for cancer patients (the percentage still living five years after treatment),  
o the occurrence of chest pain in patients who have received coronary angioplasty, o the survival rate of patients receiving coronary angioplasty, 
o the number of hospital admissions for members with certain medical conditions, o the average length of hospital stay by type of injury or illness, o the number of patients contracting an infection in the hospital, 
o the incidence of certain conditions that commonly afflict long-term diabetes patients (such as foot ulcers or blindness), o the occurrence of infants with low birth weight or of premature births, 
o patient safety issues (such as the outcomes of patient falls).  
• Functional status refers to a patient’s ability to perform certain normal activities. Can he go to work? Can he bathe, get dressed, and get around without help? Is his bowel function or sex life impaired? Functional status outcomes measures are commonly used in these areas: 

o stroke rehabilitation (physical, occupational, and speech therapy); o cardiac rehabilitation (following a heart attack or open heart surgery); and o sexual function impairment following surgery or certain drug therapies. 
• Patient perception/satisfaction relates to whether the patient feels an improvement or cured after treatment. (As mentioned above, it should be kept in mind that while patient perception can be valuable and important, it is not an objective measure.) 
These three types of outcomes measures do not always coincide to indicate to providers and patients the best treatment. For example, for a certain type of cancer, Treatment A offer a smaller chance of remission than Treatment B, but on the other hand it impairs the patient’s day-to-day functioning more than Treatment B. In this case clinical status and functional status outcomes measures conflict. 
The advantage of outcomes measures is that they directly gauge the extent to which the ultimate goal of healthcare quality—better patient health—has been achieved. But they also have a number of limitations and problems.  
• Outcomes measures are useful only if they can be linked to structures or processes that a health plan or providers can modify. If no changes can be made that would affect an outcomes measure, it has little value in quality improvement. 
• In some cases data is costly or difficult to obtain. For example, it can take 10 to 20 years to track the outcome of treatment of some slow-growing tumors such as prostate cancer. For complications from diabetes, the delay between treatment and outcome may be as long as 20 to 30 years. 
• To compare outcomes from provider to provider and health plan to health plan, data from different sources must be used, and such data may not be consistent or reliable. There may be differences in the way data was recorded and reported, making it unusable or requiring adjustments. 
• Outcomes often depend on factors that are independent of the quality of care provided and beyond the control of the provider, such as the patient’s gender and age, the severity of his condition, and other illnesses he might have. To compare outcomes fairly among providers, statistical adjustments must be made to account for these factors (called risk adjustment or case-mix adjustment). 
• Outcomes measures have the potential to create undesirable incentives for providers. If outcomes are made public and used to evaluate providers, some providers may be reluctant to treat the sickest patients. Providers are especially likely to adopt this attitude if the outcomes data are not risk-adjusted, or if they believe that the risk-adjustment methods used are inadequate or invalid.  
Note: In this section we have discussed measures of quality in general terms. In the next module we will look at specific performance measures and quality standards and the organizations that sponsor them, including HEDIS and the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) and the new star system for rating Medicare Advantage plans. 
Collecting, Analyzing, and Reporting Quality Assessment Data 
Types of Data 
The data health plans collect for quality assessment can be divided into three categories:  
Financial Data 
Financial data describe the costs of physical, technological, and human resources needed to provide administrative and healthcare services to plan members. Financial data are used to analyze how efficiently health plans and providers use resources. They typically come from the health plan’s claims and encounter reports, its administrative records, and hospital records.  
Clinical Data 
Clinical data include data related both to certain diseases and to general health and functional status. For disease data patient medical records and claims and encounter forms are the primary sources. Information on members’ general health and functional status is collected directly from members using such tools as the SF-36 and HSQ-39 (Health Status Questionnaire) surveys.  
A significant amount of information is available from these sources, but their usefulness is often limited. Poor documentation and multiple sources of information make collecting data from medical records time-consuming and expensive. Information from claims is readily available, but it is limited to diagnostic and treatment codes and costs of services.  
In an effort to make health information attainable more easily and less expensively, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) encourages all types of clinical practitioners and organizations to move toward electronic medical records. HIPAA also addresses the challenges of aggregating claims information by encouraging standardized claim forms and clearinghouses that convert nonstandard forms to standardized forms for more efficient processing and reporting. It should be noted that the U.S. is scheduled to convert to an updated diagnosis coding system (ICD10) in 2013, and this will undoubtedly create additional challenges in diagnostic tracking, trending, and reporting. 
Customer Satisfaction Data 
Customer satisfaction data describe how a health plan’s members, providers, and purchasers view the way the health plan delivers services.  
• Member satisfaction data address both members’ overall satisfaction with the plan and their satisfaction with key factors such as access, quality of care, and administration. Member satisfaction information is typically gathered through telephone or mail surveys. One of the most commonly used surveys is CAHPS®, discussed in the next module. 
• Provider satisfaction data address healthcare providers’ satisfaction with the plan overall and with key factors such as availability of contracted ancillary services (x-ray, labs, durable medical equipment, etc.), the delivery and availability of information regarding best practices, and administration.  
Customer satisfaction data also provide health plans with information about which plan services work best and which services are most important to members, providers, and purchasers.  
Data Analysis 
The analysis of financial, clinical, and customer satisfaction data provides a snapshot of a health plan’s current level of performance. By comparing actual performance to established standards, a health plan can identify areas that need improvement. By comparing current performance against past performance, a plan can identify areas of improvement and of decline. 
Reporting  
The final step in the quality assessment process is reporting results. Performance reports serve two primary purposes, internal and external.  
• Internally, performance reports can be used to help a health plan improve the quality of healthcare and services by identifying the plan’s strengths and weaknesses, giving guidance on where to focus quality improvement efforts.  
• Externally, performance reports provide accountability to the health plan’s customers and outside agencies. By comparing one plan, provider group, or delivery system to another, analysts can use performance reports to identify differences or problems in performance. Health plan customers can use this comparative information to make informed healthcare decisions.  
Quality Improvement 
Quality improvement consists of producing better healthcare outcomes (clinical, functional, and perception/satisfaction). Health plans can accomplish this by changing the structures and processes that underlie their clinical and administrative services. In other words, a health plan can improve its services by increasing or improving its resources and by changing the ways it performs services. For example, a health plan could improve access to care by expanding its provider network (a structure change) or by changing its authorization procedures (a process change).  
Elements of Quality Improvement 
To be effective, changes to structures and processes must include the following elements: 
• Planning. Before taking any action, a health plan must identify where improvement is needed, define desired outcomes, identify causes of problems and barriers to change, and decide what actions are most likely to achieve the desired outcomes. 
• Implementation. Tasks are assigned to departments and individuals, target dates set, activities monitored, and completion tracked. 
• Evaluation. After changes are implemented, outcomes are measured and compared to previous performance and to the goals set. Evaluation is ongoing— repeated measurement and analysis provide a "moving picture" of the quality improvement effort, showing whether it is having a positive effect over time. When goals are not being met, problems or barriers can be identified and changes made or additional actions taken. 
• Communication. The health plan must convey information about its quality improvement efforts and the results through the organization and to its customers. Effective communication helps define and support the plan’s mission, satisfy members’ expectations, improve provider performance, and demonstrate health plan value. 
• Documentation. Accrediting organizations and regulatory bodies require health plans to provide documentation of quality improvement assessment, planning, and evaluation. They also require documentation of the actions planned, responsible parties, and intended completion dates. This provides a written record of the health plan’s activities and their impact on its customers. 
Quality Improvement Approaches 
Health plans use a variety of strategies and tools to improve quality. We will describe some of the most common. 
Benchmarking 
Benchmarking is one of the most effective quality improvement methods. It consists of identifying for a process the best practices that produce the best outcomes and reproducing those practices in an effort to equal or surpass those outcomes.  
Example (improving service quality): A health plan wants to improve member satisfaction with claim resolution. The plan’s managers identify another plan with extremely high customer satisfaction in this area, analyze its practices, and implement them. 
Examples (improving healthcare quality): A health plan identifies a hospital with extremely high survival rates for patients undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery. It uses that hospital’s practices to develop clinical practice guidelines for treating such patients. 
Medical best practices are widely accepted in healthcare professions, so their use by a health plan is generally supported by the plan’s providers.  
Clinical Practice Guidelines 
As noted in our discussion of utilization management, clinical practice guidelines are based on approaches that have been proven to be successful. They are used to help providers consistently deliver services that will improve their patients’ health and reduce unnecessary variations in patient care.  
Clinical practice guidelines can be developed in-house by joint health plan-provider committees. Or they can be obtained from outside sources such as the National Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC), a joint venture of the AMA, the federal Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), and America's Health Insurance Plans 
(AHIP). Other sources are professional associations such as the AMA, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the many associations of medical specialists. Like best practices, clinical practice guidelines are generally accepted and supported by providers. 
Provider Profiling 
Provider profiling involves collecting and analyzing information about the practice patterns of individual providers. It is used during credentialing and recredentialing to determine how well a provider meets a health plan’s standards. Profiling also identifies providers whose practices vary significantly from the norm—they may use substantially more or fewer resources than other providers, or they may use them differently. By analyzing providers’ practice patterns, the health plan can sometimes determine whether an individual’s patterns produce better or worse outcomes and whether they are costeffective. 
Provider profiling can be useful, but it can also be controversial. It is commonly used to educate providers—for instance, a plan might inform a pediatrician that his immunization rates for children are much lower than his peers, and this should encourage him to assess his practices. But some health plans have acted punitively toward providers based solely on utilization rates or have posted such information publicly, and they have found themselves involved in class action lawsuits. As discussed above under outcomes, comparing providers statistically can be complex and difficult, requiring adequate risk adjustment, and consequently it may be difficult to demonstrate that comparisons are valid and fair and defend a punitive or public action. 
Peer Review 
In peer review a panel of medical professionals evaluates the care delivered by a provider. Unlike profiling, peer review is not based primarily on statistics. Peer review can focus on a single episode of care or take a broader look at a provider’s practices. The appropriateness and timeliness of the services delivered are reviewed, as well as outcomes and in some cases patient perceptions (as when a member complaint or negative responses to satisfaction surveys have been received). Results can be used to educate a provider and identify opportunities for improvement or to provide a measure of quality. 
One advantage of peer review is that a physician is likely to more receptive to education and recommendations offered by other physicians than by health plan administrators. And should a health plan have to take disciplinary action against a provider (such as termination of his contract), that action will be easier to defend if it is based on the recommendation of a committee of his peers. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  Landon, Bruce E.; Zaslavsky, Alan M.; Bernard, Shulamit L.; Cioffi, Matthew J.; and Cleary, Paul D. 2004. “Comparison of Performance of Traditional Medicare vs. Medicare Managed Care,” Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), 2004, 291(14):1744-1752. 2  National Patient Safety Foundation. www.npsf.org  
3
  Kohn, Linda T.; Corrigan, Janet M.; and Donaldson, Molla S., editors. 1999. “To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System.” Institute of Medicine. www.iom.edu/reports.  4  Institute of Medicine. 2006. “Preventing Medication Errors” (Quality Chasm Series). 
www.iom.edu/reports.  5  Kohn, Corrigan, and Donaldson. 1999.  
6
 Quoted in the Encyclopedia of Surgery, ”Medical Errors” www.surgeryencyclopedia.com/La-
Pa/Medical-Errors.html 

17 Quality Standards, Accreditation, and Performance Measures 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• define quality standard,  define accreditation,  identify two major accrediting organizations for health plans,   define performance measure, and  list a few of the ways the Affordable Care Act addresses healthcare quality. 
In the last module we described the methods health plans use to measure and improve the quality of administrative and healthcare services delivered to plan members. In this module we describe how quality standards, accreditation, and performance measures help health plans demonstrate the quality of their programs and services to plan members, purchasers, providers, and other external customers. Quality Standards 
Health plans typically rely on standards to assess the quality of the services they provide. Standards are defined by the Institute of Medicine as “authoritative statements of minimum levels of acceptable performance or results, excellent levels of performance or results, or the range of acceptable performance or results.” Standards represent the expectations of the health plan, members, purchasers, and outside agencies for resource utilization, healthcare and administrative processes and procedures, and outcomes. Standards also provide a means of holding health plans, their network providers, and their staffs accountable for providing quality services. 
To qualify as a valid measure of quality and performance, a standard must   relate to conditions that are important to the plan and its enrollees and providers; 
• focus on structures, processes, and/or outcomes that can be influenced through quality improvement initiatives; and   address situations that are controllable by the organization. 
Health plans may use internal or external standards to measure and evaluate the quality of their services.  
• Internal standards are developed by the health plan itself and are based on the organization’s historic performance levels. Health plans generally use internal standards to measure the quality of administrative services, such as customer service, claims processing, etc. 
• External standards are based on outside information, such as published industry-wide averages or benchmarks (sometimes referred to as best practices). Health plans usually use external standards to evaluate healthcare services, such as the rates of childhood immunization or breast cancer screening exams provided to enrollees. Many external standards are developed by accreditation organizations and are used in the accreditation process.  
Accreditation 
Accreditation is an evaluative process in which a healthcare organization undergoes an examination of its operations and processes to determine if they meet designated criteria as defined by the accreditation organization and to ensure that they meet a specified level of quality.1 The accreditation organization (also called the accrediting body) measures plan compliance with standards by means of document review, onsite visits and interviews, medical record review, and the evaluation of member services systems. 
Several organizations provide accreditation for health plans and providers. While there is some overlap, each organization has its own standards. As a result, external customers sometimes have difficulty determining which accrediting body is the most appropriate in a particular case. In this section we will look at two major accreditation organizations for health plans, NCQA and URAC. 
NCQA 
NCQA (the National Committee for Quality Assurance) is a nonprofit organization that accredits health plans, including PPOs, HMOs, POS plans, and others, as well as managed behavioral health organizations (MBHOs), credentials verification organizations (CVOs), disease management (DM) organizations, and physician organizations. More than two-thirds of all health plan members in the U.S. are covered by an NCQA-accredited plan.2 
The Accreditation Process 
NCQA’s accreditation process consists of two parts: an onsite survey of administrative and healthcare services and an offsite evaluation of audited results of selected measures of effectiveness of care and consumer satisfaction included in NCQA’s Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). NCQA uses the CAHPS 4.0H survey, which is a combination of the original HEDIS member satisfaction survey and the CAHPS survey developed by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) to measure consumer satisfaction. The core CAHPS survey questions are administered separately to commercial, Medicare, and Medicaid populations. Onsite evaluations are conducted at least every three years. HEDIS results are evaluated annually. 
Quality Standards 
During the onsite visit evaluators interview health plan staff and review materials to measure the organization’s practices against standards in the following areas related to quality management and improvement and patient care: 
program structure  program operations  health services contracting  availability of practitioners  accessibility of services  member satisfaction  complex case management disease management  
clinical practice guidelines  continuity and coordination of medical care continuity and coordination between medical and behavioral healthcare  standards for medical record documentation  delegation of quality improvement  
In accrediting a health plan, NCQA also reviews processes for utilization management (such as the review and authorization of medical care); credentialing and recredentialing of providers; members’ rights and responsibilities; and member connections (such as innovations in member service, pharmacy benefit, and interactive consumer health tools). In addition, NCQA accreditation standards address consumer protection issues related to internal and external processes for reviewing and evaluating medical appeals. Accreditation standards are updated regularly. 
The Accreditation Decision 
Results of the onsite visit and the HEDIS evaluation are combined and organized into five categories: access and service, qualified providers, staying healthy, getting better, and living with illness. Scores in each of these categories are calculated and used to arrive at an accreditation decision. Health plans can earn one of five accreditation levels: excellent (highest), commendable, accredited, provisional, and denied. The accreditation scores for health plans may total up to 100 points. A maximum of 54.14 points may be awarded based on a health plan's accreditation standards compliance and the remaining 45.86 points are based on the plan's HEDIS and CAHPS results. 
URAC 
URAC is a nonprofit organization that grants accreditation to health plans and health networks. URAC accredits entire organizations based on core standards, and it also has accreditation programs that focus on a single functional area within an organization, including case management, claims processing, comprehensive wellness, consumer education and support, credentialing, disease management, drug therapy management, health website, HIPAA compliance, utilization management, and others. 
The Accreditation Process 
URAC has separate accreditation programs for health plans and health networks, but for both the process consists of a desktop review of plan policies and procedures and an onsite visit to verify the accuracy of the documentation and the plan’s compliance with accreditation standards.  
Quality Standards 
The quality standards used for both plans and networks are fundamentally the same and address three general areas: quality improvement and management structure, organization, and staffing; the nature and scope of the quality management program; and systems for addressing complaints, corrective action, and disciplinary action. In some cases standards apply only to health plans; in other cases the standards are the same for both plans and networks, but the scope is different. For example, credentialing requirements are different for plans than for networks.  
URAC standards consist of components called elements. A “primary element” is one that has a direct and significant impact on the welfare and safety of consumers and patients. A “secondary element” is one that does not have such an impact but is a desirable feature of a high-quality program. URAC does not currently include performance data as part of the overall accreditation process for health plans or health networks, but it is developing such measures for some functional areas. Quality management standards require health plans and networks to engage in quality improvement projects, and URAC allows HEDIS measures to satisfy some of these requirements. 
Performance Measures 
In response to the demand for ways of assessing outcomes, accrediting bodies, government agencies, and commercial organizations have developed performance measures. A performance measure is a quantitative measure of the quality of care provided by a health plan or provider that consumers, payors, regulators, and others can use to compare the plan or provider to other plans or providers.  
HEDIS 
The Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS), administered by NCQA, is a performance measurement tool designed to help healthcare purchasers and consumers compare the quality offered by different health plans. Specified HEDIS measures of effectiveness of care are used as part of NCQA’s accreditation program for health plans. HEDIS 2010 divides performance measures into seven domains: 
• Effectiveness of care—whether plan members receive specific health services during stated time periods and whether the plan meets the needs of sick members and helps well members avoid sickness.  
• Access/availability of care—whether members obtain services in a timely manner without undue burdens or inconvenience. 
• Satisfaction with the experience of care—what current members think about the plan and the care provided (includes CAHPS measures). 
• Use of services—what services a member receives and the utilization of those services.  
• Cost of care—relative resource-use measures for select high-cost, high-volume conditions. 
• Health plan descriptive information—enrollment data, board certification of network providers, and the race/ethnicity and language diversity of members. 
• Health plan stability—the plan’s total membership. 
HEDIS is updated annually to enhance the quality of its evaluations and satisfy consumer demands. For example, HEDIS 2010 added measures for immunizations for adolescents and updated measures for cervical cancer screening and well-child visits. 
Additional Sources of Quality Standards, Performance Measures, and Data  
Information that can be used to improve the quality of healthcare and enhance consumers’ ability to make informed healthcare decisions is also available from commercial sources, government agencies, and professional societies.  
NCQA 
NCQA offers benchmarking information in Quality Compass, a national database of performance and accreditation information submitted by health plans. Performance measures for Quality Compass are drawn from HEDIS and CAHPS. Participation by health plans is voluntary, but many public and private purchasers now require HEDIS reporting, so many plans find it necessary to participate in order to compete effectively for customers. 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) (formerly the Agency for Healthcare Policy and Research) is the primary research arm of the federal Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). In addition to the CAHPS surveys discussed above, AHRQ has initiated a series of projects to develop quality measures and improvement strategies for medical care. For example, the National Quality Measure Clearinghouse (NQMC) is a database and website for information on specific evidencebased healthcare quality measures and measure sets. NQMC builds on AHRQ’s previous initiatives in quality measurement, including the Computerized Needs-Oriented Quality Measurement Evaluation System (CONQUEST), the Expansion of Quality of Care Measures (Q-SPAN) project, the Quality Measurement Network (QMNet) project, and the Performance Measures Inventory (PMI).  
Quality Assessment Performance Improvement (QAPI) 
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) of HHS established the Quality Assessment Performance Improvement (QAPI) program to monitor the quality improvement efforts of Medicare Advantage plans (see below) and health plans providing Medicaid coverage. QAPI establishes specific quality assessment and improvement standards that health plans must meet to remain eligible as Medicare contractors. These standards are voluntary for Medicaid programs. The Affordable Care Act and Quality 
The Affordable Care Act (healthcare reform) promotes healthcare quality improvement in a number of ways. It creates a variety of demonstration projects addressing provider compensation, information collection and analysis, and financial disclosure. It funds research on the comparative effectiveness of various medical treatments. It includes medical malpractice initiatives and makes changes to the Medicare and Medicaid programs intended to improve quality. 
ACA also calls for the development of a national quality improvement strategy to include ways to improve the delivery of healthcare services and patient health outcomes. This initiative involves the creation of processes for the development of quality measures with input from a wide variety of stakeholders, and these quality measures are expected to be used in health plan program reporting and for payment purposes. This “National Quality Strategy” is due to Congress by January 1, 2011.  
ACA and Medicare Advantage 
The most significant changes made by ACA in the area of quality pertain to Medicare Advantage. Medicare Advantage (MA) plans are Medicare-approved private-sector health plans that provide Medicare coverage and some other benefits. Medicare beneficiaries have the option of enrolling in an MA plan instead of traditional Medicare, and many do (currently 24 percent3). (MA plans are described in more detail in a later module.) 
MA plans are paid by the federal government for providing coverage to Medicare beneficiaries. ACA will generally reduce payments to MA plans, but it also gives MA plans the opportunity to obtain higher payments by meeting certain quality criteria. 
MA plans are ranked in a star system: five stars (excellent), four stars (very good), three stars (good), two stars (fair), and one star (poor). Medicare beneficiaries usually have more than one MA plan available to them, and these rankings are designed to help them choose. The rankings are based on HEDIS and CAHPS data and on 33 performance measures in the following areas: 
• preventive care (screenings, tests, and vaccines);  management of chronic conditions;  responsiveness and customer care;  telephone customer service; and  member satisfaction (complaints, appeals, members leaving the plan);  Under ACA the star rankings will affect the amount an MA plan receives from the government in two ways: 
• Rebates. Each MA plan submits a bid to Medicare, offering to provide Medicare coverage for a certain amount per member. Medicare will not pay more than a benchmark amount, which is a percentage of what it costs the government to provide Medicare coverage itself. (Benchmark percentages vary by county based on healthcare costs.) If a plan’s bid is lower than the benchmark, it is allowed to keep a percentage of the difference (a rebate). The plan can use this rebate to provide supplemental benefits to members, lower premiums, or reduce costsharing, making the plan more attractive to potential members. The rebate percentage a plan receives will depend on its ranking: plans with one to three stars will receive 50 percent, those with three-and-a-half or four stars will get 65 percent, and those with four-and-a-half or five will get 70 percent. 
Example: The MA benchmark in a certain county is 105 percent of Medicare costs, and MA Plan A submits a bid based on 95 percent. Plan A has three stars, so it can keep a rebate of 50 percent of the 10 percent difference between its bid and the benchmark, or 5 percent of costs. Plan B also submits a bid of 95 percent, but it has five stars so its rebate is 7 percent (70 percent of the 10 percent difference). 
• Bonuses. MA plans that earn four or more stars will receive bonus payments, to be phased in from 2012 to 2014: 1.5 percent in 2012, 3 percent in 2013, and 5 percent in 2014 and after. Plans in certain counties can receive double bonuses. 
As mentioned, ACA will reduce government payments to MA plans—specifically, benchmark percentages, the maximum Medicare will pay and the basis for rebates, will be gradually lowered. Quality-based payments will present an opportunity for MA plans to make up this loss, but to earn them most MA plans will have to improve quality significantly, as the average plan today has 3.27 stars, and only about a quarter of MA enrollees are in a four or five star plan. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  American Association of Health Plans. March 2000. Guide to Accreditation 1999–2000, p. 83. 2
 NCQA. www.ncqa.org.  
3 The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, “Medicare Advantage 2010 Data Spotlight, Plan Enrollment Patterns and Trends,” June 2010. 

18 Marketing 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 discuss the main considerations in product development,  identify and describe the main distribution channels for health plan products,  define market segmentation and positioning,  discuss the marketing approach to the individual market, and  compare the small, large, and intermediate group markets. 
The marketing of health plan products is a complex process that involves a variety of activities and personnel. In this module we examine the elements of the marketing process, the main health plan market segments, and the approaches used for each segment. 
The Marketing Process 
Marketing involves learning about the needs and wants of potential customers through research, developing products to satisfy those needs and wants, setting prices for these products, making customers aware of their availability and features, and selling them. The last four of these five elements—product, price, promotion, and distribution—are often referred to as the marketing mix. 
For example, a health plan organization conducts market research to find out the needs and preferences of employers and employees. It designs a PPO product with a set of benefits and features that it believes will meet those needs and preferences. It sets a premium rate (a price) that it thinks will be attractive while covering its costs and allowing for a reasonable profit. It develops promotional materials to communicate the availability of the product and the advantages it offers. Finally, the organization works with sales representatives to persuade employers to sponsor the product and employees to enroll in it. 
Research 
Marketing begins with the identification of potential customers and their needs and preferences, through research. Who are a health plan’s potential customers? They are commonly employers who would sponsor a plan and employees who would have the option of enrolling in it. They might include other kinds of group sponsors, such as professional associations. They may be persons who need individual coverage. Or they may be beneficiaries of government programs such as Medicare or Medicaid who have the option of obtaining coverage through a private-sector health plan. 
What does a health plan want to know about its potential customers? It asks these questions: What do employers want in a health plan? What do employees want (which may not be the same thing)? What price are employers and individuals willing to pay? What balance between price and quality are they looking for? 
To find out the answers to these questions, health plans use several marketing research techniques including surveys, interviews, and focus groups. A focus group is a structured but informal meeting of about six to ten people, led by a moderator who asks questions to guide the group in an in-depth discussion of a given topic. Focus groups give marketers insights into consumers’ opinions and attitudes. 
Health plan marketing differs from marketing in many other industries in an important way: The market for health plans is generally local or regional, not national, and the healthcare system and customers’ wants and needs often differ from one place to another. Consequently, although some market data can be obtained nationally, in many cases research must be conducted separately in each market, adding to costs.  
The information that researchers gather has an impact on the four elements of the marketing mix—the products an organization develops, the prices it charges, the advertising and other promotional methods it employs, and the distribution channels it uses. Also, through market research a health plan may discover an unmet need or want that it is able to address. For example, some years ago it was learned that many HMO members were dissatisfied with their lack of provider choice and direct access to specialists, and this led to the development of POS products.  
Product Development 
Product development (or benefit design) is the process of deciding what benefits a product will include and what other features it will have. Product development includes:  
• stipulating the healthcare services that will be covered (and not covered), including deciding whether ancillary items such as prescription drugs and dental and vision care will be included;  stipulating any exclusions or limitations;  setting benefits amounts and levels; 
• setting cost-sharing amounts (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) and any annual limits on the amount members can pay in cost-sharing;  establishing rules for referrals and authorization; 
• deciding how the provider network will be organized and what credentialing criteria will apply; 
• deciding whether out-of-network care will be covered, and if so at what level and with what cost-sharing; and  deciding if any benefits will be carved out and delivered by another organization. 
In making these decisions, a health plan has these objectives:  
• clearly defining what is and is not covered and what benefits will be paid;  
• clearly establishing the responsibilities of members (regarding cost-sharing, referrals, authorization, etc.); 
• promoting both cost-effectiveness and high quality by utilization management and other means; and 
• developing a product that is appealing to potential customers and competitive in the market. 
Product designers must keep the following in mind: 
• Trade-offs. A plan must balance features that will make a product attractive to customers with a price that they will be willing to pay. All customers would like to have a wide range of services covered, easy access to specialists and nonnetwork providers, and low cost-sharing, but are they willing to pay a premium high enough to support such a product? 
• Geography. As noted, customer needs and preferences may differ from one area to another, and a product must be designed to be attractive in the locality where it will be marketed. For instance, a product that would be competitive in a large city might not be in a rural area.  
• Trends. We have seen how changes in customer preferences have led to changes in product design. Product developers must be aware of current and emerging trends and create innovative products to address them.  
There is another important consideration: a product must comply with state and federal regulations. State laws often mandate that HMOs provide comprehensive coverage including prenatal care, various preventive care services, emergency care both in and out of the service area, mental healthcare, and physical, occupational, and speech therapy. There may also be state requirements for PPOs and other plans, although they tend to allow more flexibility. And under the federal Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010, all new health plans will be required to cover a comprehensive set of healthcare services, including preventive and wellness care, prescription drugs, mental healthcare, emergency care and ambulance services, and others. The ACA also restricts other aspects of product design—for instance, it does not allow cost-sharing for preventive care, sets annual limits on cost-sharing, and prohibits annual and lifetime limits on benefits. (The ACA is reviewed in a later module.) 
Successful product development requires the support and input of all functional areas of an organization, including finance (underwriters and actuaries), claims, information systems, provider contracting, utilization management, medical management, customer service, compliance, and sales.  
Many health plan organizations develop products in multiple product lines—for instance, a company might offer an HMO, a PPO, and a POS product. This can enable a company to compete more effectively, especially among large employers who often want their employees to be able to choose among several options. But marketing a diverse collection of products can present challenges. Each product line may need to be promoted and sold in a different way.  Pricing 
Of course, the price of any product is a major factor in its competitiveness, and health plans are no exception—price is in many cases the most important consideration for customers. Therefore, an organization will want to set the price as low as it can. But at the same time, it must exercise great care and planning to ensure that the premium is adequate to cover costs and allow for a reasonable profit. Pricing is discussed in the next module. 
Promotion 
In promotion a business informs potential customers about its products and itself. A health plan lets employers and consumers know what products it offers, how much they cost, and how they can be obtained. It seeks to highlight the advantages of its products and persuade employers to sponsor them and employees to enroll in them (or individuals to buy them). It also promotes itself as an organization and differentiates itself from others—it makes the case that it provides better quality, service, and convenience than its competitors. To help distinguish themselves and their products from others, businesses engage in branding—using a name, design, symbol, etc. to quickly identify a product or organization.  
There are four main promotion tools, together called the promotion mix: 
• Advertising—communication about a product or organization through the mass media that is paid for by the seller (television commercials, newspaper ads, etc.) 
• Publicity—communication through the mass media that provides information about a product or organization but is not paid for. For instance, a health plan might sponsor a community event such as a charity run or hold seminars on health topics that the local news media cover. It might issue a press release to announce its accreditation, and this might be reported as news. 
• Personal selling—person-to-person communication with the goal of selling a product. Typically, sales representatives visit or call potential customers and try to persuade them to buy.  
• Sales promotion—the use of incentives to encourage customers to buy a product or sales representatives to sell it. 
Note that personal selling and sales promotion, while considered elements of the promotion mix, are also distribution, as discussed below. 
Distribution 
Distribution is making products available to those who want to buy them—in other words, selling. Health plans have five main distribution channels: the internal salesforce, agents, brokers, employee benefits consultants, and direct marketing. A health plan may use one channel or another or a combination for a particular product or targeted market segment. 
Most distribution channels involve salespeople of some sort, who communicate directly with customers to try to persuade them to make a purchase. They also serve as a communication link between the health plan and the customer during the sales process and afterwards, answering her questions and helping her deal with the organization. 
The Internal Salesforce 
A plan’s internal salesforce are salespeople who are its employees (as opposed to agents, brokers, and consultants, who are not). This includes sales representatives, support staff, and managers. An internal salesforce may be organized by product lines (HMOs, PPOs, POS plans, etc.), market segments (individuals, large groups, etc.), geographical areas, or in other ways. 
Agents 
An agent is a person authorized by a health plan to act on its behalf to negotiate, sell, and service health plan contracts. Captive agents represent only one health plan; independent agents sell the products of multiple companies. Agents are typically compensated by commission on sales. Most agents sell primarily to the nongroup and small group markets. 
Brokers 
A broker sells and services contracts of multiple health plans (like an independent agent), but he is considered to be acting on behalf of the buyer, not the plan. Brokers review the needs of their clients and recommend the most suitable product at the best price. Most brokers work with groups. Like agents, they are typically compensated by commission. 
Employee Benefits Consultants 
An employee benefits consultant is a specialist hired by employers to advise them on health plan purchases. She evaluates and compares proposed products to determine which is most advantageous for the employer, and for large groups she may solicit proposals from many health plans. Some consultants may also be licensed brokers or agents, but unlike them they are paid by the employer, not the health plan. For this reason some believe that their judgment is more objective.  
Direct Marketing  
In direct marketing (or direct response marketing), a health plan contacts consumers directly, rather than through a salesperson. Direct mail is a common method. Typically, the plan mails material about a product to consumers along with a response card that they can mail back to the plan if they want more information or to be contacted by the plan’s internal salesforce. (Note that in the past consumers might be contacted by telephone, but this is now highly restricted by law.)  
Direct marketing allows a health plan to reach a large number of people quickly and inexpensively, and it can be targeted to a particular population, such as Medicare beneficiaries or people in a locality who do not have group health coverage. Response rates are usually low, but costs are also low compared to other distribution channels.  
Database marketing is related to direct marketing. A database is developed with information on potential customers, including demographic data, information obtained from direct mail surveys, any past contact with the plan, concerns and questions raised by the customer, etc. This allows direct mail campaigns to be more narrowly focused on people who are likely to be interested in the product, resulting in more inquiries and sales. 
Market Segmentation and Positioning 
Market segmentation is the division of the total market for a health plan’s products into smaller and more homogeneous subsets of customers, called market segments. This is necessary because different groups of customers present different marketing challenges and require different approaches. To begin with, the health plan market can be divided into a few broad segments:  
 The group market is the market for group health plans, generally sponsored by employers for their employees (or associations or unions for their members).   The non-group market has three subsets:  
o The individual market—people who need individual health coverage (those who do not have access to a group plan or want to supplement their group coverage in some way); 
o The Medicare market (the senior market)—Medicare beneficiaries 
(mostly elderly people), who can enroll in Medicare Advantage or Medicare Part D plans offered by private-sector health plans or buy Medicare supplement insurance policies from private insurers. 
o The Medicaid market—those Medicaid recipients (low-income people) who have the option of enrolling in a private-sector health plan or are required to do so. 
A health plan may break these categories down further into smaller market segments based on a number of variables (such as group size), as discussed below. 
Positioning is choosing a target market segment or niche for a product or organization in relation to the other products or organizations in the marketplace. For example, a health plan might offer a minimal benefit package at a low price to appeal to the small group market. This plan would compete with similarly positioned plans, not with highquality, high-price plans. Or an organization might offer a wide range of health plan products to compete in the large group market with organizations who do likewise.  
The Non-Group Market  
The Individual Market 
The individual market can be divided into two categories: 
• The regular individual market consists of people who, for some reason, are not covered by a group plan. Their employers do not sponsor a plan, or they are not eligible for it, or they choose not to enroll in it. Or they are self-employed, or college students without student group coverage. 
• A separate group is made up of people who had employer-sponsored coverage but have left their jobs and are not (or not yet) eligible for another group plan. These people can often convert their former group coverage to an individual policy.  
Agents and health plans’ internal salesforces are active in the individual market, and advertising and direct mail is also often used.  
The ACA will have an enormous impact on the individual market: 
• Beginning in 2014 all individuals will be required to have health coverage. For those will moderate and low incomes, subsidies (in the form of tax credits) will be available. 
• Health coverage will be marketed to individuals through government-sponsored exchanges, which will provide information to consumers about available health plans and facilitate enrollment.  
• In the exchanges individuals must be offered coverage on a guaranteed issue basis (without medical underwriting, that is, without consideration of current health, medical history, or family medical history). It will no longer be necessary or permitted to require applicants to complete health questionnaires and provide medical information, as is often done currently. 
(Again, the ACA is discussed in more detail in a later module.) 
The Medicare (Senior) Market 
Medicare is a federal healthcare benefits program available to people 65 or older, those with severe, long-term disabilities, and a few others. It is examined in detail in a later module. People eligible for Medicare constitute a market for three types of products offered by private-sector health plans and insurers: 
• Medicare supplement (Medigap) insurance. Traditional Medicare coverage (Medicare Parts A and B) is extensive, but it does not include some healthrelated expenses (such as dental and vision care), and beneficiaries must pay substantial deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments. Beneficiaries can buy Medicare supplement (Medigap) policies from private insurers to cover some cost-sharing and a few noncovered items. 
• Medicare Advantage (MA) plans. Those eligible for Medicare can choose to enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan instead of traditional Medicare. MA plans are private-sector health plans (including HMOs and PPOs) that provide Medicare Part A and B coverage and some additional benefits as well. (Note that Medicare Advantage enrollees do not need and cannot buy Medigap policies.) 
• Medicare Part D prescription drug plans (PDPs). Medicare beneficiaries choose whether they want Part D, a prescription drug program. If they do, they must select and enroll in a private-sector PDP and pay premiums to the PDP. 
(Most MA plans also offer Part D coverage.) 
To protect the elderly, the federal government has strict regulations regarding marketing to the Medicare population. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) must approve all marketing materials, and door-to-door selling and certain other practices are prohibited. 
Health plans use a variety of methods to market to seniors. Television and newspaper advertising are common, as is direct mail. A health plan can obtain mailing lists of seniors from various sources including list clearinghouses and local or national senior organizations. Some plans hold meetings in retirement centers, in which plan representatives offer refreshments and talk about healthcare concerns and the plan’s products. Both agents and a plan’s internal salesforce are typically active in the senior market.  
The Medicaid Market 
Medicaid is a federal-state program that pays for healthcare for low-income people who meet certain criteria. (It is discussed in a later module.) Some states mandate that Medicaid recipients (or certain categories of recipients) receive coverage through a private-sector health plan. 
The Medicaid market is in many ways similar to the Medicare market. Direct mail and meetings are common. And many states have strict regulations designed to protect poor people, who often have little education. States may require preapproval of marketing materials; prohibit giveaways of such things as t-shirts, buttons, balloons, and key chains; and prohibit door-to-door solicitation. 
The Group Market 
The group market is mostly employers sponsoring coverage for their employees. This includes private businesses, state and local governments, and the federal government. But group plans may be sponsored by multi-employer groups, labor unions, and professional and other associations.  
Marketing to groups has two levels. A health plan must first sell the product to the employer, and then, when it is offered to employees, it must persuade them to enroll. Employees of some large companies choose from several products offered by different organizations, so that a plan must convince them that their product is the best.  
The Small Group Market 
A small group is most commonly considered to be one with less than 100 members, but this varies somewhat by health plan. Many small businesses find it difficult to afford health coverage, so they tend to want the cheapest product possible. This often means a basic benefit package, high cost-sharing, and aggressive cost-control (such as no out-ofnetwork coverage and strict referral and authorization policies). In addition, small employers often seek to lock in premium rates for two or three years, and they tend to change plans frequently in their efforts to get the lowest price. 
Some small employers join together to form local alliances to purchase health coverage, often under the sponsorship of the Chamber of Commerce or a small business association. Their combined employee numbers give them the power to negotiate better rates and terms with health plans. Health plans usually treat these purchasing alliances as large groups for marketing purposes. And under the ACA, small employers will be able to obtain coverage through the exchanges.  
Typically, an agent or broker or the health plan’s internal salesforce sells coverage to small groups. Because small businesses normally have no employee benefits staff, they rely heavily on agents and brokers for expertise on health plans. Direct mail is also sometimes used to reach small businesspeople.  
The Large Group Market 
A health plan may consider a large group to be one with 250 or more members, or sometimes 500 or 1,000 is the criterion. The large group market includes both local accounts (employers with employees in only one locality, historically manufacturing companies and city and state governments) and national accounts (employers with employees in different localities covered by a single insurance contract). Unlike small employers, which usually sponsor only one health plan, large businesses often make available to employees a selection of health coverage options, sometimes from several organizations. And because big employers can offer health plans large numbers of potential members, they are in a stronger position than small groups to negotiate favorable rates and terms. 
Large groups are often self-funded (self-insured)—that is, the employer pays healthcare benefits to employees of out its own funds, instead of buying insurance. In this case, a health plan may offer its services as an administrator of the employer’s plan, helping hold down administrative and healthcare costs. Also, some employers with their own health benefits program give employees the option of enrolling in an outside health plan instead. (Self-funded are discussed in the next module.) 
As for small groups, cost is a very important factor, but large groups tend to also give a good deal of weight to other factors, such as healthcare quality, a variety of product line offerings, a high-quality provider network, service, employee satisfaction, and accreditation. For national accounts, network coverage of all regions where employees live is a requirement. Large groups often expect health plans to customize the design of a product to their needs and preferences.  
An large employer’s  decision to buy a health plan is made by the health benefits manager and sometimes also the CEO and chief financial officer. Large employers often use employee benefit consultants, who may request proposals from multiple health plans.  

In marketing a product to employees, the health plan’s sales representatives often work through the employer’s health benefits manager. Typically, employee meetings are held in the workplace; a presentation about the product is made, questions answered, and promotional materials distributed. Large employers may also hold health fairs (often during an annual open enrollment period) in which representatives from all the health plans offered to employees promote their products. A large employer may also use an internal website to inform employees of their health plan options and enroll them. 
The Intermediate Group Market 
Medium-sized or intermediate groups (often defined as 100 to 250 members) are in some ways like small groups and in other ways like large groups. As with small groups, price is often the determining factor, self-funding is not an option, and only one plan is sponsored. But these employers are big enough to have some negotiating power with health plans, and although they cannot require customized products, they can make some demands regarding variations in product design.  
Page 
19 Underwriting, Rating, and Financing  
Objectives 
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:  
• define underwriting and explain how it works,  describe and compare the main rating methods, 
• identify and define key elements of accounting and financial reporting in health plans, and   compare fully funded and self-funded health plans.  
In previous modules we discussed financial arrangements that a health plan makes with its providers, payors, and purchasers. This module examines how a health plan evaluates risk (underwriting), determines the amount to charge for an assumed risk (rating), and manages incoming and outgoing funds (financing). 
Recall from the last module that pricing is one of the factors in the marketing mix. In the context of health plans, pricing is the process of deciding the premium to charge for a health plan or a given set of benefits. It consists of two similar but separate processes: underwriting and rating. 
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) will have a substantial impact on underwriting and rating. However, most provisions of the law in this area will not go into effect until 2014, and many details are being worked out as the law is interpreted and regulations are written and implemented. In this module we describe underwriting and rating as they are conducted now and will be continue to be conducted for the next few years, while also indicating the principal changes that are expected as a result of PPACA.  
Underwriting 
For a health plan to provide appropriate healthcare coverage to individuals or group members at an appropriate price, the company must determine the degree of risk it will be assuming by providing coverage. The process of identifying and classifying the risk represented by an individual or group is called underwriting.  
A health plan cannot assume that each proposed risk is the same. Not all individuals of the same age and sex have the same likelihood of suffering a health-related loss. Nor do all individuals in the same occupation or the same geographic location. In addition, those individuals who believe that they have a greater-than-average likelihood of loss tend to seek healthcare coverage to a greater extent than do those who believe that they have an average or less-than-average likelihood of loss. This tendency is known as antiselection or adverse selection. The task of the underwriter is to analyze each individual or group applying for insurance in order to identify the characteristics that contribute to risk, measure the amount of risk, and determine whether the amount of risk is acceptable.  
Evaluating Risk for Individuals and Groups 
Evaluating the risk represented by a given individual generally begins with an assessment of the typical incidence of illness or injury among individuals of the same age and gender. Using this rate as a reference point, underwriters then consider the effect of risk factors specific to the individual, such as occupation and health status, to identify the amount and type of risk the individual represents.  
Underwriters can find much of this additional information in an underwriting manual prepared by the plan’s actuaries (defined below). An underwriting manual is a document that provides background information about various underwriting impairments and suggests the appropriate action to take if such impairments exist. Underwriting impairments are factors that tend to increase an individual’s risk above that which is normal for her age. In underwriting for individual insurance policies, persons with an average risk of loss are typically classified as standard risks, those with lower-thanaverage risk as preferred risks, and those with higher-than-average risk as substandard or unacceptable risks. 
When evaluating the risk for a group policy, underwriters focus on the risk characteristics of the group as a whole. Group characteristics include the following: 
the reason for the group’s existence, the size of the group,  the flow of new members into the group,  the stability of the group,  the number of eligible group members who will participate in the plan,  the way in which benefit levels will be determined, and  the activities of the group.1 
Because health plans accept all eligible plan members, underwriting for groups focuses primarily on whether the group presents a good distribution of risk—that is, whether the good health of a large number of individuals offsets the higher utilization of healthcare services by unhealthy group members. Although few groups are large enough to provide entirely predictable experience, a health plan generates enough business so that the combination of many groups provides predictability for underwriting purposes. 
Medical Underwriting  
In states where it is not prohibited some health plans may conduct medical underwriting for small groups. Medical underwriting refers to the evaluation of health questionnaires submitted by all proposed plan members to determine the insurability of the group. Based on the underwriting assessment, an underwriter may recommend that group policies include: 
 Waiting periods—periods of time during which insured group members’ medical expenses are not covered. 
 Preexisting conditions provisions—limitations or exclusions of health coverage for conditions that arise before the effective date of coverage. 
 Benefit exclusions—exclusions of health coverage for specified medical conditions. 
The purpose of these policy provisions and exclusions is to enable the health plan to cover the group at a reasonable cost. 
PPACA will have a significant impact on medical underwriting beginning in 2014: 
• Guaranteed issue. For health plans purchased through the new governmentsponsored exchanges and in the individual and small group market, coverage must be offered on a guaranteed issue basis—that is, without consideration of an individual’s current health, medical history, or family medical history. 
• Waiting periods. Employers with 50 or more employees will have to pay a penalty if a waiting period is more than 60 days, and for all employer-sponsored plans waiting periods of more than 90 days will be prohibited. 
• Preexisting conditions. For all health plans, benefits may not be excluded or limited for preexisting conditions (effective for children in 2010).  
Underwriting Requirements  
The primary goal of a health plan’s underwriting function is to accurately assess risk so that the health plan can charge premiums that are adequate to cover its expected costs. That goal, however, must be consistent with the health plan’s marketing goals. A health plan that has very strict underwriting requirements may save money on healthcare costs, but the plan probably will have significantly lower plan enrollment. On the other hand, a health plan with relaxed underwriting may obtain numerous contracts with various groups, but it may experience increased costs because of antiselection. Striking a balance between underwriting standards and marketing goals is critical to a health plan’s success and ultimately its survival. 
Listed below are several types of underwriting requirements, which are requirements that health plans sometimes impose in order to provide healthcare coverage to a given group. Some of these requirements relate to group characteristics, while others relate to financing measures such as cost-sharing (which we have seen before). Together they are designed to balance a health plan’s knowledge of a proposed group with the ability of the group to voluntarily select against the plan (antiselection). Note, however, that a health plan may be prevented from imposing these requirements in certain situations because of regulatory requirements or market demand for guaranteed eligibility, no deductibles or coinsurance, no waiting periods, and no preexisting conditions provisions. 
Common underwriting requirements include the following:2 
• Minimum participation requirements—a percentage of total eligible employees or group members that must enroll in the health plan. 
• Benefit limitations—a maximum number of hospital days or treatments for certain health conditions or a lifetime maximum dollar amount of benefit payments. 
• Deductible—an upfront dollar amount that a plan member must pay for covered healthcare costs before the health plan pays benefits. 
• Coinsurance. After a plan member has satisfied the deductible, the plan pays a percentage of remaining covered healthcare costs (typically 80 percent) and the member is responsible for the rest of costs (typically 20 percent), up to a specified maximum out-of-pocket cost to the plan member. 
• Enrollment restrictions. Members may enroll in a plan only during defined enrollment periods, such as on joining a group as a new employee, during annual open enrollment periods, or at birth (for a dependent of a member). 
• Health statements—statements made by proposed insureds during the medical underwriting process attesting to their good health and insurability. 
PPACA will restrict some underwriting requirements: 
• Lifetime limits on benefits are prohibited as of 2010.  
• Annual limits on benefits are restricted as of 2010 and will be prohibited in 2014. 
• For most health plans there will be limits on the total cost-sharing (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) an insured can be required to pay during a year. 
Renewal Underwriting3 
A health plan typically guarantees a premium rate for a specified period, usually one year. At the end of the initial period, and usually each year thereafter, the health plan’s underwriters reevaluate the contract. Through renewal underwriting underwriters review all the selection factors that were considered when the contract was first issued, then compare the group’s actual utilization rates to those the health plan predicted during its initial underwriting of the group. Based on this, the underwriters determine the group’s renewal rate. At a minimum, renewal underwriting involves a reevaluation of two factors: the group’s experience and the level of participation in the health plan. 
• Experience. A group’s experience is the cost of providing healthcare to the group during a given period of coverage. Changes in this experience can have a significant effect on the premium amount the group is charged for coverage. For example, if a group’s actual experience is greater than its predicted experience, the health plan will most likely increase the group’s premium at renewal to account for these increased costs. 
• Participation. Underwriters verify the degree of employee participation in a plan to ensure that a sufficiently high level of participation exists to reduce the chance of antiselection. In some cases, if the degree of employee participation drops below an acceptable level, an underwriter may require increased participation before renewing the contract. 
Successful renewal underwriting requires that a health plan support a database to track utilization, demographic factors, and other relevant data in order to obtain information on costs per plan member and the amount and frequency of utilization by type of medical benefit.  
Legal Requirements  
State laws define the ways in which health plans can underwrite and price healthcare products. For example, in some states a health plan may increase its price to an employer if the health plan determines that the employer represents a greater risk than that assumed in calculating the base rates. Similarly, the health plan would be able to price the product lower than its base rate if the health plan determines that the employer represents a lower risk than that incorporated into the base rate. 
On the other hand, some states prohibit a health plan from charging more than the base rate listed in its rate manual for specified products or plans, such as HMOs. In such cases, the health plan may be able to decline coverage for a group if the group’s expected risk is greater than that assumed in calculating the base rates. However, some states do not allow HMOs to deny coverage for any group, regardless of a group’s expected risk level, so an HMO’s base rates must reflect this increased risk. 
Rating 
Once a health plan has assessed the risks that an individual or group presents and has identified which risks are acceptable, it can determine the cost of covering those risks. Rating is the process of calculating the appropriate premium to charge purchasers, given the degree of risk represented by the individual or group, the expected costs of delivering medical services, and the expected marketability and competitiveness of the health plan’s plan. A premium is typically a prepaid payment or series of payments made to a health plan by purchasers, and often plan members, for medical benefits. 
The insurance professionals who perform the mathematical analysis necessary for setting insurance premium rates are called actuaries. A health plan’s actuaries are responsible for ensuring that the plan’s operations are conducted on a financially sound basis. The actuaries’ goal, therefore, is to ensure that the premium rates that the health plan charges purchasers are adequate to cover expected plan costs. Premium rates, however, must also be competitive, to encourage a large number of healthy individuals to enroll in the plan. The balance between the actuarial function (ensuring that the plan is financially sound) and the marketing function (ensuring that the plan is marketable) is a critical component of product development. Regular review of its rating method provides a health plan with information on whether the plan is achieving both actuarial and marketing goals. 
Health plans use a variety of rating methods in developing premiums. In this section we will discuss four of the most commonly used methods: community rating, manual rating, experience rating, and blended rating. 
Community Rating 
Community rating is a rating method that sets premiums for financing medical care according to the health plan’s expected costs of providing medical benefits to the community as a whole rather than to any subgroup within the community. Both low-risk and high-risk classes are factored into community rating, which spreads the expected medical care costs across the entire community. If claim costs exceed the premiums received, the plan is financially responsible for the additional costs. 
Community rating is seldom used for large groups, except where required by state law, because other rating methods are more competitive. However, the premium rate obtained by the community rating method is often calculated first as a point of reference for calculating the premium rate under other rating methods. On the other hand, several federal and state initiatives have mandated community rating methods for small groups. Small groups benefit from community rating because they incur less fluctuation in premium rates and more stable health plan contract relationships.  
Standard Community Rating and Tiers 
Under standard community rating (also called pure community rating), a health plan considers only community-wide data and establishes the same financial performance goals for all risk classes. Therefore, the health plan charges all employers or other group sponsors the same dollar amount for a given level of medical benefits or health plan, without adjustments for age, gender, industry, experience, etc. 
Health plans can vary the rates within a single plan, however, by dividing members into tiers (classes) according to the number of individuals covered. No other factors are used to distinguish among the members in each tier. Two-tier arrangements, with an employee-only tier and a family tier (the employee and one or more dependents) are commonly used under all rating methods. Three tiers (employee only, employee and one dependent, and employee and two or more dependents) are also common. Sometimes four or five tiers are used. The premium a plan member pays depends on the tier into which she fits. For instance, in a two-tiered system all members who enroll in Tier 1 (employee only) pay the same monthly premium, which differs from the premium paid by all members who enroll in Tier 2 (family). 
Health plans can also adjust the total premium amount charged to a group to reflect the number of covered members in each tier. For example, if Employer A has four covered members per family contract, the health plan can charge it a higher premium than it charges Employer B, which has 3.5 covered members per family contract. The premium rate applied to each group, however, must be the same. 
Other Community Rating Methods 
In 1991 the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) adopted a Small Group Model Act that allowed health plans to use a modified form of community rating to underwrite small groups. This modification, referred to as community rating by class (CRC), allowed a health plan to divide its members into up to nine rating classes based on demographic factors, industry characteristics, or experience. In this context experience means a specific group’s historical healthcare costs and utilization rates. Each of the rating classes had prescribed minimum and maximum premium rates and all members of the same class or group paid the same premium. The average premium in each class could not be more than 120 percent of the average premium for any other class. 
A 1995 amendment to the NAIC Small Group Model Act eliminated the class rating rules and required plans to use adjusted community rating. In the context of small group coverage, adjusted community rating (ACR), also called modified community rating, is a rating method under which a health plan divides its members into classes or groups based on demographic factors such as geography, family composition, and age, and then charges all members of a class or group the same premium. The plan cannot consider the experience of a class, group, or tier in developing premium rates. The 1995 amendment, however, did not require states to change existing laws. Laws based on the 1991 Model Act that allowed rating classes based on experience factors still exist in many states. 
Manual Rating 
When an underwriter has no recorded or reliable claim experience for a group, she typically uses manual rating to establish the group’s premium. Manual rating is a rating method under which a health plan uses the plan’s average experience with all groups (and sometimes the experience of other health plans), rather than a particular group’s experience, to calculate the group’s premium. Manual rates are sometimes called book rates because a health plan often lists them in a rate book, underwriting manual, or rate manual. 
Health plans often use manual rates to set premiums for groups that have had no previous health coverage. Underwriters also use the manual rate as a starting point when using other rating methods. 
Experience Rating 
Underwriters typically use experience rating to calculate the premiums for groups that have a credible claim history. Experience rating is a rating method under which a health plan analyzes a group’s recorded healthcare costs by type and calculates the group’s premium based partly or completely on the group’s experience. Under experience rating, a health plan charges lower premiums to groups that have experienced low utilization of healthcare services and higher premiums to groups that have experienced high utilization. Because a group’s experience changes over time, a health plan typically uses at least two years of a group’s experience to calculate experience rates. 
In most cases the size of the group is important in determining the degree to which experience rating applies. Health plans typically experience-rate large groups. Note that the definition of what constitutes a large group varies among health plans. A health plan may define a large group as consisting of anywhere from 50 to 1,000 members. 
However, most health plans experience-rate groups that have 1,000 or more members.  
Experience rating methods include prospective experience rating and retrospective experience rating:  
• Under prospective experience rating, a health plan uses a group’s past experience to estimate the group’s expected experience for the next period. Premium rates are calculated according to this expected experience. If the group’s actual experience during the rating period is different than expected, the health plan absorbs the gains or losses. Twelve months is a typical prospective experience rating period for primary care; shorter rating periods may be use for specialty services such as vision care and dental care. 
• Under retrospective experience rating, a health plan looks back at the end of a rating period and evaluates the gains and losses experienced by a group during that period. If the group’s experience during the period is better than expected, the health plan refunds part of the group’s premium in the form of an experience rating dividend. If the group’s experience during the rating period is worse than expected, the health plan charges the group for the excess costs, either in a lump sum or in future premium increases. Federally qualified HMOs cannot use retrospective experience rating. 
Health plans sometimes also experience-rate small groups by underwriting a number of small groups as if they constituted one large group and then evaluating the experience of the entire large group. This practice is known as pooling. The purpose of pooling is to allow small groups to take advantage of the lower premium rates often available to large groups. 
Blended Rating  
For groups that have some, but not extensive, recorded claim experience, health plans often use blended rating. Under blended rating a health plan forecasts a group’s cost of benefits based partly on the health plan’s manual rates and partly on the group’s experience.  
The amount of weight the health plan gives to the manual and experience rates depends on the credibility of the group’s experience. Credibility is a measure of the statistical predictability of a group’s experience. Typically, a health plan assigns a credibility factor—usually expressed as a percentage or a decimal between 0 and 1—to a group’s experience rating. This credibility factor represents the degree to which the health plan has estimated that the available experience data accurately represent the group’s risk. The experience of a large group is generally more credible than that of a small group. 
To calculate a blended rate, the health plan multiplies the group’s experience rate by the group’s credibility and multiplies the applicable manual rate by 1 minus the group’s credibility. The sum of these two calculations is the blended rate.  
Example: A group’s manual rate is $130 per member per month. Its experience rate is $115 per member per month. The credibility factor is 70 percent (0.70). The experience rate is multiplied by the credibility factor ($115 X 0.70 = $80.50). The manual rate is multiplied by 1 minus the credibility factor ($130 X 0.30 = $39). The two dollar figures are added, yielding a blended rate of $119.50, less than the manual rate but somewhat higher than the experience rate. 
Legal Requirements 
Federal or state laws may require that health plans use a particular rating method in determining premium rates. In some cases regulation depends on plan structure. For example, amendments to the HMO Act of 1973 permit federally qualified HMOs to use community rating, community rating by class, or adjusted community rating, but not retrospective experience rating, in determining premium rates for health plans. State requirements may define the specific community rating method that federally qualified HMOs may use. Federally qualified HMOs must obtain approval for using adjusted community rating, and they cannot charge more than 110 percent of the rate charged under pure community rating to groups with 100 or fewer members. 
Individual states also establish requirements for HMOs that are not federally qualified and for other health plans. The rating methods that non-qualified HMOs, preferred provider organizations (PPOs), and point-of-service (POS) option plans use are similar to those used for indemnity plans and are usually subject to state insurance regulations. Federally qualified HMOs that offer a POS option must comply with federal requirements for rating the HMO and state requirements for rating the POS option. 
In other cases regulation is based on the specific population or group served. Some states require all health plans to use community rating for individuals and small groups. 
Other states require community rating for individuals and all groups, regardless of size. A health plan that pursues government contracts must use rating methods that are permitted under federal law. For example, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) require all health plans that assume Medicare risk to use adjusted community rating. Also, to obtain contracts for the Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) program, a health plan cannot charge the federal government more than it charges other groups of a similar size. State and county requirements establish Medicaid reimbursement rates and limit rate setting to a specified maximum percentage of provider fees. (We discuss government healthcare benefits programs toward the end of the course.) 
In addition to specifying the rates health plans can charge small groups, the NAIC’s Small Group Model Act limits the rate spread, which is the difference between the highest and lowest rates that a health plan charges small groups, to a ratio of two to one. For instance, if the lowest rate that an HMO charges a small group is $62.50, the highest rate it charges for the same set of medical benefits cannot be greater than $125. Forty states have enacted laws that are variations of the NAIC’s Small Group Model Act. 
A health plan may be required to file yearly reports outlining the rating method used to establish premium rates with the insurance department in each state in which it conducts business. Any changes made to the rating method or rate schedule must also be submitted for regulatory approval. 
PPACA will also have an impact on rating. As of 2014, there will be limits on differences in rates charged different individuals. Such differences may be based only on age, geographical area, family size, and tobacco use. In age-based rating the highest rate cannot be more than three times the lowest rate, and a higher rate imposed for tobacco use can be no more than 150 percent of the standard rate. 
 

Financial Management 
For most health plans financing includes financial management and plan funding. In this section we discuss financial management, which is the process of managing a health plan’s financial resources, including management decisions concerning accounting and financial reporting, forecasting, and budgeting. We examine plan funding in the next section. 
Laws and Regulations 
Health plans must comply with accounting standards and financial reporting requirements established by law or regulation. For example, public corporations must publish an annual report and must file corporate income tax returns on a timely basis. A company’s annual report must include audited financial statements, including a balance sheet, income statement, cash flow statement, and statement of stockholders’ equity, among other financial data. 
As noted in an earlier module, some HMOs and other health plans may have to comply with financial reporting requirements established by state insurance regulators. Sometimes a large health plan may consist of one or more subsidiaries or other legal entities that are subject to state insurance regulations even if the health plan is not. 
Some health plans may have to file an annual statement with the NAIC and the insurance regulatory body in each state in which they conduct business. The annual statement consists of numerous financial statements, exhibits, and schedules. In addition to the above financial reporting requirements, health plans that are for-profit public corporations must be concerned with meeting stockholder expectations about corporate earnings, profits, and stock price.  
Key Elements of Accounting and Financial Reporting4 
Two major accounts—revenues and expenses—appear on an MCO’s income statement, which is the financial statement that summarizes an MCO’s revenue and expense activity during a specified period. Also included in the income statement is net income, also call profit, which is the excess of total revenues over total expenses. If total expenses exceed total revenues, the result is a net loss. 
• Revenues are the amounts earned from a company’s sales of products and services to its customers. Typical revenues for an MCO include premiums and fees generated from plan members and group sponsors (generally employers) and the interest earned on premiums and fees. Premiums comprise the greatest percentage of a health plan’s revenues. 
• Expenses are the amounts spent or committed to pay for covered benefits and their administration. Typical expenses for an MCO include administrative expenses, stop-loss insurance premiums, provider reimbursement costs, and plan utilization costs. Administrative expenses include marketing and selling costs, salaries of health plan employees, advertising, and benefits administration. Provider reimbursement costs include physician salaries or capitation payments and hospital and ancillary service provider fees. 
Three major account categories—assets, liabilities, and capital—appear on an MCO’s balance sheet, which is the financial statement that shows an MCO’s financial status on a specified date.  
• Assets are all items of value that a company owns. Typical assets for an MCO include invested assets, cash and cash equivalents, and receivables, which are dollar amounts expected from outstanding (not yet received) health plan premiums and copayments. 
• Liabilities are all debts and obligations of a company. The most significant liabilities for health insurance companies are its reserves, which are estimates of money that an insurer needs in order to pay future business obligations. Reserves include incurred but not reported (IBNR) claims, which are claims or benefits that occurred during a particular time period but that have not yet been reported or submitted to an insurer or MCO and so have not yet been paid.  
• Capital in this context is the money that a public company’s owners have invested in the company. 
Surplus is the amount that remains when an insurer subtracts its liabilities and capital from its assets. 
Statutory Solvency 
State insurance regulators are primarily concerned with an HMO’s statutory solvency, which is its ability to maintain at least the minimum amount of capital and surplus specified by state insurance regulators. Individual states establish the minimum capital and surplus requirements necessary for an HMO to conduct business. Under the NAIC’s HMO Model Act, which many states have adopted, an HMO must maintain at least $1 million in capital to remain in business. Additional capital requirements in the HMO Model Act require HMOs to maintain specified percentages of their annual premiums and expected healthcare expenses. 
Internal Reporting 
In addition to external financial reporting requirements, the financial management function of a health plan compiles internal management reports and statements that enable health plan managers to monitor financial performance. Forecasting and budgeting are examples of internal management reporting methods. 
• Forecasting is a process that involves predicting an MCO’s incoming and outgoing cash flows—primarily revenues and expenses—and predicting the values of its assets, liabilities, and capital or capital and surplus. The purpose of forecasting is to provide information than an MCO may use to ensure its future financial strength and profitability. Typically, a company develops a detailed forecast for each product or line of business.  
• Budgeting is a process that includes creating a financial plan of action that an organization believes will help it achieve its goals, given the organization’s forecast. Through budgeting, an MCO may establish dollar projections for its revenue and expense targets for its ongoing operations. Throughout the year the budgeting process provides the MCO with timely reports that enable it to monitor variances between expected and actual revenues and expenses. Variances are the difference obtained from subtracting actual results for expected (budgeted) results. 
Comparing the amounts in the expected budget with those in the actual budget provides a variance for each budgeted item. Most health plans monitor variances on a monthly or more frequent basis. Analyzing the source of the variances provides management with the information it needs to make rating decisions and adjust the budget accordingly.  
Typically, a health plan analyzes its variances for medical expenses by type, such as primary care, specialty care, inpatient hospitalization, pharmacy benefits, and so on. Alternatively, a health plan may analyze its variances by population and by health plan. For example, a health plan may not only separately analyze variances for primary care expenses for large employer groups, Medicare populations, and Medicaid populations, but also according to type of plan, such as HMO, PPO, and HMO with a POS option. 
A financial manager uses variances to refine the budget for the next period. Analyzing variances also enables managers to monitor and evaluate a health plan’s overall financial performance. Large variances between expected and actual revenues or expenses usually result in revised budgets or operational changes. For example, significant increases in expenses for specialty care may result in a revision to the incentive plan for PCPs to decrease specialist referrals. 
Another critical factor in a health plan’s survival and success is the health plan’s ability to manage its flow of funds (money). Fund inflows primarily include revenues and fund outflows generally include expenses. Therefore, accounting for revenues and expenses on a timely basis is critical to monitoring the flow of funds in any organization. A health plan must make strategic and operational decisions to ensure a positive flow of funds, which means that the health plan’s funds inflows are greater than its funds outflows. 
  
Plan Funding 
Plan funding is the method that an employer or other payor or purchaser uses to pay medical benefit costs and administrative expenses. A health plan may be financed or funded in a variety of ways, subject to federal and state requirements. In this section we describe two common types of plans: fully funded plans and self-funded plans. We also briefly discuss third party administrators. 
Fully Funded Plans 
In a fully funded plan an insurer or health plan bears the responsibility of guaranteeing claim payments, paying for all incurred covered benefits, and administering the health plan. If the dollar amount of claims or administrative expenses exceeds the dollar amount of premiums collected, the health plan or insurer is responsible for the difference. On the other hand, if the group has fewer claim expenses than anticipated, the health plan or insurer has an opportunity to make a profit that is greater than anticipated. A fully funded plan is the traditional funding arrangement for a group health plan. The group’s policyholder, typically an employer, makes monthly premium payments to the health plan. 
Self-Funded Plans  
In a self-funded plan (also called a self-insured plan), an employer or other group sponsor, rather than a health plan or insurance company, is financially responsible for paying plan expenses, including claims made by group plan members. The group sponsor, typically a large employer or group of employers, assumes complete financial responsibility for the incurred covered benefits and related expenses. A group may be partially or fully self-funded. Under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), a self-funded plan is exempt from specified state insurance regulations. 
In a self-funded plan, the money that an employer and employees would have paid in premiums to an insurer or health plan is deposited into an account, called the funding vehicle, until the money is paid out. Employers pay only for incurred healthcare costs in a self-funded plan, so they save money when employees’ utilization of medical care is lower than expected. However, employers are responsible for all incurred claims and other expenses, even if the funded amount is exhausted. 
Stop-Loss Insurance 
If a self-funded group experiences catastrophic medical claims or actual utilization is significantly greater than expected during a year, the employer might not have the financial resources to pay all the claims. For this reason, many self-funded employers choose to purchase stop-loss insurance, which enables them to place a dollar limit on their liability for paying claims. Stop-loss insurance can be purchased in several forms. 
• Individual stop-loss coverage (or specific stop-loss coverage) provides benefits for claims on an individual that exceed a stated amount in a given period.  
• Aggregate stop-loss coverage provides benefits when the group’s total claims during a specified period exceed a stated amount. Under the terms of the stoploss contract, the employer pays all incurred healthcare costs up to the amount specified in the contract out of its own funds.  
The stop-loss carrier assumes financial responsibility for all costs in excess of the specified amount. The stop-loss carrier does not make benefit payments directly to the insured group members; instead, the carrier reimburses the employer, which retains responsibility for making claim payments. 
Administration 
In a fully funded plan the insurer or health plan usually handles both the administrative and claims paying functions. But in a self-funded plan an employer or group sponsor must decide whether to perform the administrative duties on its own. An employer has several options in plan administration. 
The employer may self-pay, which means that the employer administers the plan itself by hiring a staff and purchasing the appropriate information management systems. 
Alternatively, the employer may hire an independent third party to administer the plan. A third-party administrator (TPA) is an organization that administers group benefit plans for self-funded groups, but that does not have the financial responsibility for paying benefits. The employer retains the financial responsibility for paying claims for the selffunded group. 
Examples of administrative services that TPAs provide to self-funded groups include claims administration and membership services. A TPA may also offer advice to clients on the purchase and design of employee benefits programs. The contract between an employer and an insurer or other TPA is called an administrative services only (ASO) contract. Third-party administrators are usually paid a fixed fee per employee for administering the terms of the ASO contract. 
Conclusion 
In this module we have learned about three important health plan functions: 
• In underwriting a health plan assesses the risk it will assume by providing coverage to an individual or group. The underwriter identifies factors that contribute to risk, estimates the amount of risk, and determines whether the risk is acceptable. 
• In rating a health plan calculates the premium it should charge an individual or group for coverage. The amount is based on the risk presented by the individual or group, the expected cost of medical services, and marketability and competitiveness.  
• In financial management a health plan’s monetary resources are administered, monitored, and coordinated. This includes accounting, reporting, forecasting, and budgeting. 
We also examined plan funding—how an employer pays for employee healthcare benefits and related administrative expenses. An employer-sponsored health plan may be fully funded, with claims and administrative costs and liability borne by a health plan or insurance company, or self-funded (self-insured), with the employer bearing those costs and liability.  
Notes 
                                                 
1  Harriett E. Jones and Dani L. Long, Principles of Insurance: Life, Health, and Annuities, 2nd ed. (LOMA ), 1999. 2  Adapted from Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, Pricing and Financing the Product, 1992. Used with permission, all rights reserved. 3
  Adapted from Gene Stone, Insurance Company Operations (LOMA), 2000. Used with permission; all rights reserved. 4  Adapted from Elizabeth A. Mulligan and Gene Stone, Accounting and Financial Reporting in Life and Health Insurance Companies (LOMA), 1997. Used with permission, all rights reserved. 

20 Information Management  
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• describe the kinds of information and information system capabilities needed by health plans,  discuss some of the main challenges in managing information, and  
• describe the use by health plans of information technologies, including ebusiness and e-commerce, electronic data interchange (EDI), business intelligence (BI) and decision support systems (DSSs), data warehouses, electronic medical records, networks, and personal health records (PHRs) and electronic health records (EHRs). 
In this module we explore health plans’ needs for information and information management capabilities. We discuss challenges involved in data management and describe some of the ways health plans can use information technology to help them operate effectively and efficiently. 
Information Management Needs 
Having current, correct information available to the right person at the right time in the right format is critical to the success of health plan operations. Therefore, a health plan needs an accurate, efficient method of information and data management. Information management is the combination of systems, processes, and technology that a health plan uses to provide its employees with the information they need to carry out their job responsibilities and to provide plan members, providers, purchasers, and other companies and organizations with the information they need to do business with and otherwise interact with the plan. 
Other important purposes of information management are to ensure the security of health plan information— that is, to see that only authorized parties have access to it— and to facilitate the exchange of information. Health plans need capabilities for information exchange among internal functions and with external entities. For example, quality management program directors need member satisfaction information from member services to include in reports to external parties such as purchasers, providers, members, regulatory agencies, and accrediting bodies. The accounting department needs information from network management and claims to correctly reimburse providers for healthcare services delivered to members. 
Common information needed by health plan personnel include the following: 
• descriptions of benefit structures of the health plan’s products,  member eligibility rosters,  current information about network providers, 
• reimbursement arrangements with participating providers,  information to support the authorization process,  reports on utilization and quality management programs,  information on member and provider satisfaction with the health plan,  information on claims and claims processing,  premium billing and payment information for various purchasers, 
• the results of performance measurements for various health plan departments, and  financial information for accounting and financial reporting purposes. 
Needs for Information System Capabilities  
An information system is an interactive combination of people, computer hardware and software, communication devices, and procedures designed to provide a continuous flow of information to the people who need it to make decisions or perform activities. Health plans have three basic types of information systems: 
• systems to assist plan personnel with day-to-day operations and transactions (such as processing claims or billing purchasers for premium payments); 
• systems to support the analysis of accumulated data and information and to report the results of that analysis (for instance, preparing periodic financial statements or evaluating preventive care, case management, or disease management programs); and  
• systems to support electronic transactions and information-sharing between itself and others—members, providers, and other individuals and organizations that work with the plan. 
In addition to general transaction and reporting systems, plan managers typically need some or all of the following specialized system capabilities to support various activities in the organization: 
• Credentialing. Plan managers need to obtain and review the documentation of healthcare professionals and institutional providers, including licensure, certifications, facility privileges, evidence of malpractice insurance, malpractice history, etc. A credentialing system tracks provider credentials and generates notices of the need for recredentialing, based on license expiration dates, the date on which the provider’s credentials were last reviewed, continuing education requirements, etc. 
• Contract management for health plans can be complex, particularly under capitation. If a health plan is unable to track costs and patient encounters and treatment accurately, it will be unable to reconcile capitation payments and manage risk pools, and if it is unable to monitor eligibility, it runs the risk of paying benefits for ineligible people. Factors that often affect members’ eligibility status are changes in employment, changes in marital status, or coverage under more than one plan. A contract management system incorporates membership data and provider reimbursement arrangements and analyzes transactions according to contract rules. It may also include features such as decision support, modeling and forecasting, cost reporting, and contract compliance tracking. 
• Utilization management. Health plans and providers need information systems for managing authorization transactions and utilization. In a health plan environment, pre-established guidelines determine which services require authorization of payment from the health plan. Automated systems incorporating authorization requirements can facilitate the processing of requests for authorization. To monitor the actual use and costs of care, health plans require systems that track the utilization of services by type of service and provider. Many health plans also want systems specifically designed to manage access, utilization, and quality of care under case management or disease management programs. 
• Quality management. Positive outcomes of treatment and lower incidence of illness define value to customers. To compare plans and make a purchase decisions, customers need information about providers, treatment options, care outcomes, and plan performance. Health plans need information systems that can store, analyze, and report on large amounts of clinically significant data over time to support the development of quality indicators, outcome measures, and clinical protocols and guidelines. 
• Provider profiling is critical to managing the quality and cost of the care provided by network providers. Profiling helps a health plan detect overutilization, underutilization, and inappropriate utilization of medical resources. Managers need systems that enable them to identify those providers whose costs of care or whose treatment patterns deviate significantly from the norm. 
• Enterprise scheduling. In large healthcare organizations (particularly providerbased health plans and staff model HMOs), there is a need to manage the use of services and resources such as MRI equipment and surgery centers. An enterprise scheduling system permits physician groups, hospitals, and other facilities within an enterprise to function as a single organization in arranging access to facilities and resources. 
• Claims processing depends on the accumulation and analysis of a vast amount of information about plan members, providers, compensation arrangements, fee schedules for specific types of services, authorization requirements, and plan structure and benefits. The information gathered by the claims department is also used by other functional areas within the health plan, including member services, marketing, finance, medical management, contracting, and provider relations. Health plans must ensure that the information collected and disbursed by its claims administration process is accurate, complete, and up-to-date. 
• Marketing. The ability to communicate information about plan membership, benefits, and services is critical to the survival of a health plan. Health plans need to convey information to purchasers and members (both current and potential) concerning plan performance and effectiveness. Often, employers offer employees a choice of health plans, and it is easier to make this choice when there are common measures of plan performance in place. Health plan marketing departments also need information about current customers, potential customers, competing health plans, and sales force activities to plan and implement their marketing strategies. 
• Member Services. Health plans need information systems that make access to information, transaction processing, and other types of services fast and convenient for members. Such systems typically incorporate data management with communications systems. Members should be able to access information about claims, the health plan and its programs, and health and wellness through online portals. 
• Sales. To facilitate sales through brokers or direct channels, plans need systems that automate quoting, contracting, and enrollment functions. These systems may be stand-alone e-commerce systems (see below), or they may provide information to other entities for incorporation into their e-commerce systems. Under healthcare reform (discussed in a later module), information will have to be supplied to exchanges through which many people will buy health coverage. 
• Finances. From the general ledger to accounts payable and procurement systems, health plans see the pass-through of very large sums of money, as premiums come in and medical claims are paid. Financial systems must account for all payments as well as for financial assets and reserves. 
Challenges in Managing Information and Data  
In effectively managing information and data, health plans face several significant challenges. 
• A high volume of data from multiple sources. A health plan must be able to manage a large volume of data from both internal and external sources. A plan generates tremendous amounts of internal data including documentation of its business operations and detailed records of the services it delivers to purchasers, providers, and plan members. Providers generate additional data in the course of treating members. The plan also receives external data from purchasers who maintain records on plan members and from a wide variety of state and federal agencies. 
• Different types of data. Providers generate clinical data related to healthcare services and outcomes. Regulators and accrediting agencies provide operational information about legal requirements and quality standards. The health plan generates provider and member satisfaction data and financial data related to revenues and expenses. The health plan must be able to understand all of these types of data and the relationships between them. 
• Quality of data. Health plans often experience difficulties acquiring data that is complete, accurate, and consistent from one source to another. Medical management, network management, and claims processing activities frequently rely on coded information submitted by providers, such as codes for a member’s diagnosis and the healthcare services delivered to her. However, the coded information does not always provide enough detail for the health plan to process the transactions associated with those services. For example, if the coded information is incomplete, the health plan may not be able to evaluate provider or health plan performance or to process requests for authorization of payment, provider reimbursements, and payments of claims. Inaccuracies in data often result from provider or health plan staff errors made while inputting the diagnostic and procedural codes. Inconsistencies arise because different providers sometimes use different diagnostic codes for similar types of patients or different procedural codes for the same procedure. 
• Usability of data. The data that is readily available and easy to collect may not be the most relevant for the health plan’s transaction processing or reporting needs. The health plan may need to manipulate the data or process it through additional analytic tools before it is meaningful for plan operations. 
• Different formats. A health plan must be able to manage different data formats. Data from providers and plan members is frequently in paper documents. Much of the data generated by a health plan is in electronic form, but it is often distributed in separate databases, such as a provider database, a member database, and a claims database, each of which may have different organizational structures and use different software. In many cases, the approach to information management varies among different programs within the same health plan function. The lack of coordination and compatibility among information management processes typically result in higher costs and less efficiency.  
• Reporting requirements. A health plan’s information management systems must be able to produce many different types of reports on different schedules. Report needs vary according to the nature of the function, the activities included in the function, the level of detail desired, and the type of analysis that has been performed on the data. For example, case management staff may need to examine the complete set of data about the patient cases they are managing, while the case management program director needs a concise summary of current case data along with notations of trends or problems. Ideally, the information management system can produce reports in the frequency, format, and level of detail appropriate for each report user’s purposes. Although information users typically need information rather than raw data, on occasion they may need access to the data as well. 
• Security and privacy. The security and privacy of sensitive medical information is of special concern for health plans, members, providers, and purchasers alike. In accordance with HIPAA, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has established federal regulations to protect the confidentiality and security of members’ medical information (as discussed in a later module). Other regulations, such as the Medical Records Confidentiality Act of 1995 and the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995, specify severe sanctions for healthcare organizations that fail to guard the privacy of medical information. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act) of 
2009 strengthens privacy safeguards for patients’ protected health information. 
Although information management in a health plan environment is typically a complex process, not all aspects of information management are completely or even partially automated. In many instances, health plan personnel manually perform some or all of the steps necessary to obtain and use information. The automation of information management for health plans requires technical expertise and is generally expensive and time-consuming, but it is essential. 
Information Technology 
Information technology refers to the wide range of electronic devices and tools used to acquire, record, store, transfer, or transform data or information. The types of information technology used by health plans vary greatly, but in this section we will look at some of the most important. 
E-Business and E-Commerce  
In a health plan context, electronic business (e-business) and electronic commerce (e-commerce) refer to a plan's use of computer networks to perform business transactions and facilitate the delivery of healthcare and nonclinical services to members. The term e-business generally encompasses all types of electronic business functions, including the exchange of information both within the plan and with plan members, purchasers, providers, regulators, accrediting bodies, and potential members and purchasers. The term e-commerce refers to online commerce, including merchandising, sales, and payment. 
Although the automation of information exchange processes generally requires a significant upfront financial investment, conducting business electronically is now considered a basic business function. And e-business offers significant advantages over manual systems. The electronic transmission of data and information is typically faster, and this enables plans and providers to avoid delays in determining the appropriate care and in delivering that care to members. Furthermore, by enhancing online functionality, health plans can provide more access to information more efficiently, reducing support costs. A health plan’s e-business level of complexity and automation depends on the plan’s level of investment and online business maturity.  
The Internet provides health plans with a cost-effective means of transmitting and obtaining information and conducting selected informational transactions. Health plans generally have their own websites, which they use for a variety of purposes. Informational uses include: 
• marketing products and services to potential purchasers,  explaining the plan’s covered benefits and authorization systems to members, 
• supplying a network provider list and information about those providers to members, 
• educating members about healthy lifestyles and self-care,  reporting information on healthcare and service quality, and 
• disseminating member eligibility information, clinical practice management information, and formularies to providers. 
Transactions that can be performed include: 
• changing members’ administrative information (such as addresses),  changing members’ primary care providers,  refilling prescriptions by mail,  receiving and checking the status of claims filed by members and providers,  receiving and processing providers’ requests for authorizations of payment and transmitting the decisions on those requests,  updating member eligibility lists based on changes submitted by purchasers, and  receiving electronic payment from purchasers. 
While health plans have historically lagged behind other industries in providing a high level of service online, many plans have enhanced or are now enhancing their websites and are providing a variety of self-service functions to consumers, providers, employers and brokers. They are expanding into e-commerce, enabling consumers to shop for their healthcare coverage needs, price their options, and buy products online. 
Under healthcare reform, exchanges will be established where health plans can provide information about their products, and where consumers who meet certain criteria will be able to shop for coverage. Health plans will need to have the technical capability to submit information to these exchanges in an established format. 
Security Requirements and Considerations 
In doing business online, a health plan needs to protect the information that it makes available to users, as well as other information that may reside in the plan’s network. Since the Internet is open to everyone, the potential exists for unauthorized access to a health plan’s proprietary systems and to confidential information about individual members. In light of federal legislation in health information security (such as the privacy 
and security provisions of HIPAA) and customer expectations of privacy and confidentiality, healthcare executives need to be sure that their enterprises are not vulnerable to security breaches and that the applications and networks are appropriately secured. 
Some of the main types of Internet information security technology are these: 
• A firewall is a security device (hardware or software or both) designed to block unauthorized access to a network (such as an intranet) from the Internet while permitting authorized access.  
• An anti-virus program is designed to prevent viruses from infecting a computer and cleaning and restoring an infected computer. 
• Encryption is the transformation of text or data to make it unreadable to those who do not have special knowledge. This is done so that the information is accessible only to those for whom it is intended. 
• A digital signature (electronic signature) is an encrypted digital tag attached to an electronic communication to verify the identity of the sender. 
To obtain a higher level of security than presently exists on the Internet, some health plans have established intranets and secured extranets.  
• An intranet is an internal (private) computer network built on web-based technologies and standards. Access to an intranet is available only to members of the computer network. Intranets are utilized by health plans to provide internal employees with access to the various information management systems, as well as important content such as company news, administrative systems, document management systems, and other knowledge-bases. 
• An extranet is like an intranet, but it links selected resources of an organization to external entities or individuals. These external parties (in the case of health plans, providers, members, and regulatory and accrediting agencies) need a user ID and password (and sometimes encryption technology) to gain access. While many people may not be familiar with the term, they do often encounter and use extranets—secure access to a user’s information is a common functionality provided by many companies online including banks, credit card companies, retail sites, and health plans. 
The major threat to data security in a network is not a small number of external hackers but internal security breaches by employees or others authorized to use the network. The employee motivated by curiosity or malice, the careless employee who unwittingly provides an unauthorized user with access to a password, and the employee poorly trained in the use of a system remain the greatest threat to data security in any information network. Role-based security within an organization is essential to minimize such security breaches. 
Site Monitoring and Analytics 
Measurement of the availability and activity of a website is an important part of managing online capabilities. Monitoring software measures site availability and response time by running automated transactions and measuring task completion and the time taken. Web analytics record site activity such as page views, new versus repeat visitors, and other indicators of how users are using the site. Analytics is an important tool for measuring the success of a website for both serving a plan’s existing customers and attracting new ones. 
Electronic Data Interchange 
Electronic data interchange (EDI) is the computer-to-computer transfer of data between organizations using a data format agreed on by the sending and receiving parties. Information is routed through network systems and follows standards and procedures that allow output from one system to be processed directly, without human intervention, as input to other systems. Organizations doing business with one another by EDI are called trading partners. EDI differs from e-business that EDI is the transfer of data, typically in batches, while e-business involves back-and-forth exchanges of information concerning individual transactions and often the performance of some type of service. 

EDI can be used by health plans for the following activities: 
• the transmission of claims and encounter reports from providers to the health plan,  
• the transmission of data from the plan’s claims database to various medical management departments,   the transmission of data among different health plan departments or locations,  the exchange of data between a health plan and regulatory or accrediting bodies, 
• the transmission of membership and eligibility data from an employer to a health plan,   the transmission of member eligibility data from a health plan to its providers, and 
• the exchange of information between a health plan and its providers regarding requests for authorizations of services and referrals. 
The Advantages of EDI 
• Faster transmission and processing. EDI reduces the time required for purchasing, claims processing, and other functions, and it increases employee productivity, reducing costs. 
• Reduced paperwork. The exchange of standardized electronic forms for activities such as purchasing and claims can slash paperwork and the associated costs. The largest cost of claims processing is labor, particularly for data entry and examination functions, and electronic transmission and processing of claims can lower staffing requirements greatly.  
• Improved data integrity. In a manual process, each step has the potential for human error. For example, if a health plan receives paper claims or encounter reports, employees must enter the data into the plan’s system, and they may do so incorrectly. When such data is transmitted automatically, the potential for errors can be minimized. 
 Improved business methods. The use of EDI forces an organization to focus on and improve the details of repetitive transactions and to upgrade internal procedures. It creates an opportunity for process reengineering and realization of the efficiencies such reengineering can achieve. 
The pressure on the healthcare industry to reduce administrative costs is likely to drive still greater adoption of EDI. 
Technology Requirements for EDI  
EDI requires a data communication link between the participating organizations or departments. The Internet may serve as this link, or data may be sent by standard telephone lines. EDI also requires a standardized data format—computers cannot process the information that moves between organizations electronically unless it is encoded in a manner that the computers at both organizations can recognize. For EDI to achieve its full potential, all entities in the healthcare industry need to agree on common standards. Several organizations have already created or are developing such standards for various functions and types of data.  
Business Intelligence and Decision Support Systems 
In addition to improving access to data and information, information technology can support problem-specific decision-making. A business intelligence (BI) system or decision support system (DSS) uses databases and decision models to enhance the decision-making process for health plan executives, managers, clinical staff, and providers. They do so by analyzing data from a database and reporting the results. They can detect trends or relationships in the data that are not immediately obvious. For example, health plans may use a DSS to analyze the effect of healthcare services on members’ health, and this information can be used to identify the most effective medical interventions. Other capabilities often included in DSSs are provider profiling and tracking of provider reimbursement. 
One type of DSS is the expert system, a knowledge-based system that provides expert consultation to those solving specialized and complex problems. Expert systems apply general rules to data to determine the answer to specific questions. Their primary use by health plans is for claims administration, although some plans use them to assist with medical management decisions. The advantages are the ability to store and recall extensive sets of rules and to consistently apply those rules. 
For healthcare providers, DSS technologies focus on supplying information needed when clinical decisions are made. Such concurrent decision support systems provide users with patient-specific clinical information that can be used to develop treatment guidelines based on a specific diagnosis of a problem, warnings of drug interactions, etc., and to manage the appropriateness of referrals, procedures, and levels of care. These DSSs are viewed not as automated replacements for the expertise of providers, but rather as a tool to facilitate clinical and operational decisions. 
Data Warehouses 
A health plan’s information and data are typically gathered independently by different functional areas of the plan or external sources, and as a result they are often divided among distinct, unlinked databases. This means that someone seeking organizationwide information may have to search several databases in different functional areas or even within a single area. This increases the time it takes to acquire information and labor costs. In addition, the data from the various databases may be in different, incompatible formats, or a person may not have ready access to all databases.  
To address these problems, many health plans use data warehouses. A data warehouse is a database (or set of databases) containing data from many sources (often both internal and external) linked by a common subject (such as a plan member). The data from the various sources is integrated so that it is non-repetitive and in a standard format. Users can analyze the data in the warehouse through the use of query applications. 
Advantages and Disadvantages 
Data warehouses have many advantages: 
• Health plan personnel are better able to prepare complete, accurate reports because they can merge data from various separate sources (such as claims administration and utilization review). A consistent format also makes possible the comparison of data across different types of health plan products (such as HMO versus PPO) and against data from other health plans.  
• Data warehouses typically store large amounts of historical as well as current data, facilitating the analysis of information over time. For instance, suppose a medical management program director wants to know if the average age of the population covered by the plan in a geographic region is increasing and if this correlates with changes in the incidence of and cost of care for specific illnesses. Individual databases would probably not have this information, but a data warehouse combining data from many sources could.  
• A warehouse approach relieves individual databases from having to store large amounts of data that are not needed for daily operations, and decreasing the amount of data in a database typically speeds the response time to a query. 
• Data warehouses are the foundations of business intelligence and decision support systems. These systems analyze the data in warehouses to support decision-making. 
The principal disadvantages of data warehouses are the complexity and cost of implementing them. Typically, the construction of a data warehouse is very timeconsuming and requires significant technological expertise and financial resources. Consequently, even though a data warehouse may make health plan operations more efficient and improve the quality of healthcare, the return on the investment in one may not be realized for several years. 
Electronic Medical Records 
The medical records of health plan members have traditionally been in the form of paper documents and kept at the site where care was provided. But increasingly, providers and plans are using a electronic medical record (EMR), also called a computer-based patient record (CPR), a computerized record of a patient’s clinical, demographic, and administrative data.  
• Clinical data can include a member’s medical history, current and past medications, diagnoses, test results, current treatment status, and other healthcare information. Advanced EMRs can include digital images from CT scans, MRIs, and X-rays. 
• Demographic data include the member’s name, address, age, gender, and similar relevant information. 
• Administrative data can include the plan type (HMO, PPO, etc.), plan sponsor (the purchaser), membership number, and providers who have treated the member. 
While the exact data in EMRs vary, all EMRs include medical information for an individual member and are designed to be used at the site of care (such as a physician’s office, clinic, or hospital). This is in contrast to databases and data warehouses that typically organize information by categories such as the type of treatment or provider and are designed primarily for use in utilization and quality management. EMRs also include some clinical decision support for providers—for example, EMR software can be designed to alert a provider to possible drug interactions.  
Networks 
Health Information Networks 
EMRs enhance healthcare quality, but they are used at a particular site of care, and it is even more advantageous if medical records can be transmitted across an entire network of providers. One approach is distributing EMRs is through a health information network (HIN) or health data network (HDN), a computer network that gives the providers of a health plan access to a database of medical information.  
In one type of arrangement, a health plan’s HIN is linked to a data warehouse that stores the very large amounts of data that reside in the medical records of an entire provider network. The HIN makes the data in the warehouse available online to a defined set of users, such as health plan hospitals, physicians, pharmacists, and specified health plan personnel.  
A health plan can also use a secured extranet design or a distributed database approach for the HIN. With a distributed database approach, a database system (including either the whole database or only the relevant portion) is located at more than one site. For example, the EMR database might be available at several different hospitals and at large provider groups’ locations. 
Most HINs are Internet-based rather than built on proprietary computer networks. Whatever the network infrastructure, the health plan typically houses a central database or data warehouse that accepts, organizes, and stores EMR information as it is entered and then makes EMRs available to authorized users.  
Advantages of HINs 
HINs improve the quality of medical care because all the information in a patient’s medical history is readily available to each provider at the point of service. For example, suppose that a health plan operates a HIN that includes the hospitals, physicians, and pharmacies in the health plan’s network. After examining a patient, a PCP might write a prescription and make a referral to a specialist. The PCP’s staff updates the patient’s EMR to reflect the services delivered during the office visit. The pharmacist filling the prescription can immediately check it against the diagnosis and against other medications the patient is currently taking and note that the prescription was filled. The specialist can see what medications were prescribed, what tests were conducted, and what notes the PCP made regarding the diagnosis. When the health plan reviews the claim, it can match diagnostic and treatment codes, verify authorization, and record utilization information. 
HIN-supported EMRs have a distinct advantage over non-networked forms of medical record-keeping, particularly the common practice of using paper documents. A HIN allows multiple healthcare professionals, even in different locations, to access a member’s chart simultaneously. With paper records, if a plan member receives care from providers at different physical locations, either the paper records must be copied and faxed or carried between locations, or the providers themselves must discuss the details of the chart. Further, with paper records, the possibility exists that records may be lost or at least temporarily misplaced. 
The capacity of HINs to capture a large amount of data about healthcare services and outcomes in a uniform format also affords health plans the following benefits: 
 Improved care and service. Immediate access to current, complete information about members facilitates providers’ delivery of high-quality care in a timely and cost-effective manner. Improved access to information also improves continuity of care. For example, a HIN provides a means of reducing duplicate services and otherwise coordinating care among providers in different locations.  
 	Cheaper information administration. A HIN may help a health plan reduce its administrative costs by enabling more accurate and efficient claims processing, online authorization of payment for services, electronic transfer to mail-order pharmacy programs, improved credentialing, up-to-date online provider directories, up-to-date membership lists, and online case management.  
 	Improved outcomes measurement. Health plans can extract outcome trends from the HIN data warehouse using computer software designed for this purpose. This outcome information can be used for developing clinical practice management tools such as clinical practice guidelines.  
 Better management of provider performance. Using data gathered through its HIN, a health plan can identify providers who have superior outcomes and who comply with UM and QM programs. 
 Improved efficiency and accuracy of information entry. Most HIN systems present providers and their staffs with computer screens that list standard options for entering data about patient care. Rather than type in this data or record it on paper, the provider or staff member can simply click on the appropriate option, which saves time and reduces the possibility for clerical error.  
 Reduced legal liability. EMRs and HINs give providers a means of documenting their work to show compliance with quality programs, and they assist health plans in demonstrating that quality care is being uniformly delivered to plan members. 
 Easier reporting. HINs give a health plan a vehicle for capturing information that may be required by regulatory agencies or accrediting bodies. 
Health Information Exchange and Regional Health Information Organizations 
The advantages of HINs are multiplied when medical records and other information can be accessed not only by all the providers of a health plan’s network, but throughout the healthcare system. Health information exchange (HIE) is the electronic sharing of clinical information among the information systems of the various healthcare organizations of a community or region. 
HIE gives a physician or other provider access to records of the care and services a patient has received from many providers, both inside and outside her health plan’s network, both current and past. This further extends the gains of an HIN, enhancing the quality of care and helping to avoid errors, as providers’ decision can be based on complete and accurate information from all sources. HIE also has great potential for cost-savings, as the duplication of tests and services can be eliminated, referrals and consultations can be conducted more quickly and easily, and administrative time to obtain or send records can be reduced—again, even when care has been received outside a plan’s network. HIE also provides a wealth of data for quality and utilization management and for research and public health goals. 
Organizations, both independent and government-sponsored, have emerged to set up and operate HIE; they are called HIE systems or simply health information exchanges (HIEs). Regional health information organizations (RHIOs) have been formed by the healthcare entities of a geographic area (such as hospitals, clinics, health plans, and purchasers). RHIOs and other HIEs develop and manage contractual agreements between entities, arrange for the means of electronic exchange of information, and establish and maintain standards. Many RHIOs and other HIEs are supported financially by grants from the federal government, provided under the HITECH Act.  
Personal Health Records and Electronic Health Records 
Personal Health Records 
A personal health record (PHR) is a history of an individual’s health and her encounters with the healthcare system that is owned by the individual and securely maintained for her by a custodian, typically her health plan. A PHR is populated with claims and administrative data collected by the individual’s health plan and in some cases information entered by the person herself, and it forms a coherent, personal history of care that can be used to coordinate and track her encounters with the healthcare system. PHRs will eventually be portable across the healthcare system, so that as an individual changes health plans or employers or enrolls in Medicare, her PHR will go with her. 
Many health plans offer PHRs to their members, often in partnership with entities such as WebMD, American Specialty Health, and others. In addition, both Google and Microsoft now offer online computer applications that enable people to store personal health information in a centralized place for access by themselves or other authorized people such as family members and providers.  
The major barrier to widespread implementation of PHRs is the lack of a standard that would allow the information in a PHR to be both inter-operable (usable by different entities) and portable. While a number of current standards and data sets exist, gaps remain and there is no comprehensive “PHR standard.” 
Electronic Health Records 
An electronic health record (EHR) is a provider-based history of care that compliments the personal health record by adding detailed information created by providers and facilities (such as X-ray images, physicians’ notes, and information on compliance with statutory or regulatory requirements) that are part of the legal and permanent institutional records of patient care. 
In 2004 President George Bush called for the widespread adoption of inter-operable EHRs within the next decade, and efforts at the national level have focused on EHR adoption and the development of interconnectivity among the numerous healthcare stakeholders. Adoption has been slow, but the HITECH Act of 2009 mentioned above is expected to spur increased innovation and use of EHRs. It provides for incentive payments to organizations that can prove meaningful use of them and reduced Medicare reimbursements for those that cannot. 
Outsourcing Information Management 
The technical demands of designing, setting up, and maintaining information management systems and processes can be considerable. External vendors offer a wide variety of services and products, and they may be hired by health plans to help them design and establish new systems such as data warehouses or HINs. A health plan may also outsource some or all of its information management activities to an external vendor rather than conduct them itself. The plan specifies its information management requirements and provides data to a vendor that designs an appropriate system and conducts the information management activity on a day-to-day basis. The vendor also creates the reports that the health plan requires. 
Advances in technology and connectivity have made possible hybrids of insourcing and outsourcing. Software-as-a-service (SAAS) and cloud computing can now enable an organization to achieve the benefits of sophisticated systems without the investment in infrastructure or the operational costs of maintaining them internally. As cloud computing grows, the capabilities that it offers and the level and ease of integration with the variety of systems in use by health plans will evolve. 
The purchase of information management products and outsourcing arrangements are typically long-term commitments for a health plan. Outsourcing often requires a significant financial investment and complex legal and administrative arrangements. And because information management is so critical to a health plan's operations, any disruption in the relationship between the plan and the vendor can be very costly for the plan. Therefore, a plan should select a vendor that is financially stable and has a reputation for high-quality products and technical support.  
Conclusion  
Health plans are increasingly information-driven, so a plan’s approach to information management impacts virtually every aspect of its operations. Information technology has grown in importance because many plans have discovered that its effective use can improve the performance of their people and processes. The trend toward greater investment in technology, particularly Internet-based technology, is likely to continue as health plans attempt to achieve quality and cost-effectiveness in a highly competitive industry. 

21 Claims Administration 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 describe the roles of technology and personnel in claims processing,   discuss the use of codes and edits in claim processing, and   state the main questions that must be answered in processing a claim. 
A claim is a request to an insurer or health plan for payment of benefits. In health coverage, it usually takes the form of an itemized statement of healthcare services delivered by a healthcare provider to a covered person, along with the cost of those services. The person or entity submitting a claim is called the claimant; this may be an insured, but in health coverage it is most often a provider. Claims administration or claims processing is the receiving, reviewing, adjudicating, and paying of claims. (To adjudicate a claim is to make determinations and decisions about it.) 
In this module we examine the processing of health plan claims by automated computer systems and by claims examiners and other personnel; learn about important elements of processing systems, such as standardized claim forms, diagnosis and treatment codes, and edits; and survey the adjudication of a claim by identifying the questions that must be answered before a claim can be paid.  Health Plan Claims  
Traditional Insurance and Health Plans 
In traditional indemnity health insurance, the provider sends a bill to the insurer for the services delivered (or less commonly the insured pays the provider herself and then sends a claim to the insurer with the provider’s bill attached as documentation). The insurer processes the claim to determine if payment is in fact due and if so pays the provider or insured.  
In a health plan, the claims function varies by plan type and provider compensation arrangement. In some cases a plan such as an HMO does not receive claims requesting payment for services rendered because providers are prepaid for delivering those services to members by means of a capitation payment, or because they are paid a salary. Instead, the plan receives encounter reports. An encounter is a visit by a plan member to a provider of healthcare or related services. An encounter report includes the services provided, the date of service, the diagnosis, and other information. A health plan uses encounter reports to track utilization and provider practice patterns and as a basis for future capitation amounts. 
However, most healthcare professionals are compensated by health plans on a discounted fee-for-service (FFS) basis or a combination of FFS and capitation, and hospitals are typically paid their regular charges minus a percentage discount, case rates, or fixed rates for specific procedures. In these cases, claims are submitted, and health plan claims processing is very similar to that of traditional insurance. 
Technology 
In the past health plan claims were mostly paper documents received by mail and reviewed and adjudicated by plan employees. Today, typically between 80 and 90 percent of a plan’s claims are processed by automated, computerized systems, sometimes more. Providers generally transmit claims to a plan by electronic data interchange (EDI) (discussed in the preceding module). When paper claims are received, the data is entered into the electronic system so that they can be automatically processed. Increasingly, optical character recognition (OCR) technology is used to convert printed or even handwritten text into electronic files. 
Electronic claims processing systems perform routine and simple tasks, such as verifying that an individual is a plan member or that a doctor is a network provider. And most health plans also use such systems to make decisions that require more in-depth analysis. A database containing member profiles, member benefit packages, provider profiles, provider compensation arrangements, and other information is either integrated with or part of an expert software system enabling the claims system to make higherlevel claims decisions. Such a system attempts to replicate the process an expert claims examiner uses to solve a problem to arrive at the same decision that the expert would. This process is commonly called auto-adjudication.  
Federal legislation promotes the electronic transmission of claims and the automation of claims processing. Provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) standardize electronic claims submission and payment while safeguarding the privacy and security of individuals’ health information. 
Personnel 
Of course, computers cannot do everything and cannot run themselves—many health plan employees are involved in processing claims. A claims administration department includes the following personnel: 
• Data entry clerks key in information from paper documents, and other employees convert documents into electronic data in other ways (such as scanning and OCR). This function is often outsourced. 
• Other employees are variously called claims examiners, processors, reviewers, analysts, or adjudicators. Their exact duties may vary by title or plan, but essentially they review and adjudicate claims that are not electronically processed for some reason, typically because they present some complication or there is an inconsistency in the data or other problem. 
• Claims adjustors deal with claims that have been paid incorrectly. For instance, if an insufficient amount is paid and the provider protests, the adjustor reviews the case and ensures that the correct amount is paid. 
• Specialists of various sorts handle complicated cases and address such matters as quality control, regulatory compliance, coordination of benefits, and medical management.  
• Supervisors and managers oversee the work of claims examiners, other employees, and automated systems. They may also handle complex and largeamount claims. 
Explaining the payment or denial of a claim to a provider or member is typically handled by the member services department (discussed in the next module), not claims, although of course the two departments must work closely together.  
A claims administration department may be organized by plan type (HMO, PPO, etc.), service type (hospital, physician, etc.), in-network and out-of-network care, or employer group (especially for large groups). Some health plans contract with insurance companies or third-party administrators to process certain types of claims, such as routine claims, out-of-network claims, or claims for specialty services such as radiology, behavioral health, and pharmacy. 
Information 
A claims administration department both takes in a great deal of information and supplies information to other plan departments. For a claims database the following types of information are needed: 
• information on members and their covered dependents, including date of birth, gender, and PCP; 
• information on providers, including the national provider identifier (NPI), network or non-network status, and any restrictions on the types of services a provider can perform for the plan; 
• general information on provider compensation (such as fee schedules) and the specific compensation arrangement the plan has with each provider (including risk-pooling, discounts, etc.); and 
• requirements for members, including cost-sharing (deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance) and authorization and referral requirements.  
The information that is needed is also affected by compensation methods, as discussed above. If a provider is paid by capitation or salary, only encounter reports with a relatively limited amount of information is required. On the other hand, if a provider is compensated by fee-for-service, a fee schedule, a discount off charges, or similar methods, full claim information is needed. Typically, a plan’s claims processing system must be able to handle both types of arrangements. For example, in an HMO a PCP may be paid by capitation but a specialist by discounted FFS. 
The claims department is also a source of information for the plan. Data obtained in the claims process is transmitted to and used by other departments, including member services, finance, information management, medical management, provider relations, contracting, and others. It may also be used for marketing purposes, but there are regulatory restrictions—a member must agree to this.  
Finally, a claims department uses data to generate a variety of periodic reports to help it manage its own productivity and quality. These include the percentage of claims processed within a certain timeframe, such as 30 days; the percentage auto-adjudicated; the percentage rejected or denied; and the percentage adjusted and/or appealed. 
Key Elements of Claim Processing 
Standard Claim Forms 
Most health plans have done away with their own claims forms and require the use of these nationally standardized forms: 
• UB-04—required by the Uniform Billing Code of 2004 and used by healthcare facilities and organizations (hospitals, clinics, home healthcare agencies, etc.). 
• CMS-1500—developed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and used by healthcare professionals such as physicians. 
Codes 
To indicate in a claim a patient’s medical condition and the service or treatment provided, claimants must use standard diagnostic and treatment codes. A code is a series of numbers and letters that corresponds to a specific diagnosis or treatment. These codes help simplify and standardize claims processing.  
• For diagnoses, the required code set is the International Classification of 
Diseases (ICD). As of October 1, 2013, for healthcare transactions covered by HIPAA (including most claims) the Tenth Revision of the ICD (ICD-10) will be required. 
• For treatments, the most frequently used code set is the Physicians’ Current Procedural Terminology (CPT). This is a list of medical services and procedures performed by physicians, hospitals, and other healthcare providers, with a unique 5-digit code for each. CPT codes are maintained by the American Medical Association and are also referred to as Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) Level 1 codes.  
Edits 
An electronic claims processing system, as well as the procedures followed by claims examiners, includes edits. These are criteria that, if unmet, result in a claim being “kicked out” of the process and “pended”—that is, the claim is not automatically processed, but instead payment is delayed while the claim is scrutinized and concerns addressed. For example, an electronic system generally includes an edit that identifies a claim in which the service provided is not generally associated with the diagnosis reported. Such a claim would be kicked out and reviewed to see if the service was in fact appropriate. 
Adjudicating a Claim 
Adjudicating a claim (determining whether it should be paid and if so how much) can be thought of as satisfying a number of questions about the claim. In this section we review the main questions. 
Member and Provider Status and Timely Billing 
• The system must confirm that the person who received the services being billed was a member of the plan and eligible for benefits on the date the services were provided. 
• It must be confirmed that the provider is enrolled in the plan’s claims system. If not, the claim will be sent back to her with a request for information so that she can be enrolled.  
• If a plan does not pay benefits for out-of-network care or pays a higher level of benefits for in-network care, it must be determined whether the provider is a network provider. 
• Most plans require that a provider bill within a certain time (typically 90 to 180 days) after a service has been delivered. If a claim is submitted after that time, it is not generally paid, and the provider is not allowed to bill the member for the service. Therefore, it must be confirmed that the claim has been submitted within the required time after the service was delivered. 
Edits relying on dates of service, member numbers, providers’ NPIs, and other data are used to identify claims that do not satisfy the above conditions and must be examined or denied. 
The Healthcare Service 
An automated claims system (or a claims examiner) must also ascertain whether the healthcare service provided to the member was a covered service under the member’s benefit package, medically necessary and appropriate, authorized if required, and actually performed. 
Uncovered Services 
As we have seen, some healthcare services are not covered by a health plan. These include experimental treatments as well as procedures not needed to address an illness or injury (such as cosmetic surgery). Such uncovered services must be identified by the process and the claim denied. 
Medical Necessity and Appropriateness 
As we have learned in this course, health plans pay benefits only for healthcare services that are medically necessary and appropriate, and the claims process includes confirming that the services provided were in fact necessary and appropriate. This also promotes healthcare quality by ensuring that members receive the services that are most likely to result in positive outcomes. And it reduces a plan’s medical malpractice liability—a plan can be liable for the negligent acts of its employees or medical staff and in some cases contracted providers, so it must take measures to ensure that the care they provide is appropriate. 
Clinical edits flag claims for which additional medical information is needed, such as when diagnosis and treatment codes are missing, incomplete, or invalid. The claim is kicked out of the system, and the provider must resubmit it with complete and correct information. Edits are also triggered by conflicting information (a diagnosis code for tonsillitis and a treatment code for bursitis) or illogical responses or codes (a maternity service for a male). Such claims must be examined and clarified. Clinical edits are typically supplied by an external vendor whose software specializes in healthcare codes and is integrated with the health plan’s claims system. 
Authorization 
As we have also learned, for some services most health plans have authorization or referral requirements that must be met for benefits to be payable. An electronic claims processing system is typically set up to recognize these services and look for a corresponding authorization in the plan’s databases. If authorization is not found, the claim will be flagged and reviewed by a claims examiner.  
If authorization was not obtained, the health plan is not obligated to pay for the service; more traditional plans may pay a reduced amount (typically 50 percent). In some plans the authorization for a particular case may stipulate how much will be paid. 
Delivery 
Obviously, if a service billed was not actually provided to a member, the plan will not pay, and fraud may even be involved. If information is insufficient to show that a service was in fact rendered, or if something indicates that the service may not have been rendered (such as a nonemergency service reported for a Saturday, or a physician billing for more visits on a certain date than would be reasonably possible during a working day), the claim must be examined and more information sought. 
The Amount 
The system (or claims examiner) calculates the amount to be paid for a claim based on numerous factors. These include the provider compensation arrangement that applies (fee schedule, discount off charges, etc); any cost-sharing owed by the member (deductible, copayment, or coinsurance, including differences for network and nonnetwork care); any payment instructions stipulated by an authorization; and other considerations. 
It must also be ascertained whether a member is covered under another health plan, and if so, whether coordination of benefits applies. Recall that coordination of benefits provisions are designed to prevent a person covered under more than one health plan from receiving more in benefits than her actual expenses and to ensure that each plan pays the correct amount. 
Summarizing the Process 
To summarize the proceeding paragraphs, the process by which a claim is adjudicated can be seen as satisfactorily answering a series of questions:  
• Was the individual who received healthcare services a member of the plan and eligible for benefits when the services were provided?  
• Is the provider enrolled in the plan’s claims system? Is the provider in the plan’s network?  
• Has the claim been submitted in a timely manner? 
• Is the service covered?  
• Was the service medically necessary and appropriate?  
• Was an authorization or referral required for the service, and if so, was it obtained?  
• Was the service actually provided? 
• What benefits are payable?  
• Does the member have any other health insurance coverage?  Claim Investigations 
If a claim lacks important information, a plan may simply deny it, and the provider must modify and resubmit it. In other cases, if a claim triggers an edit, or if a claims examiner has reason to question the claim, there may be a claim investigation—the plan seeks further information before making a decision. Usually this involves only short, simple searches or requests, such as checking a medical record or calling a doctor’s office. Such basic investigations are typically handled by claims examiners by phone, email, or mail or database search.  
However, a few claims require extensive investigation. A good deal of information may be needed, or information may not be easy to obtain. An interview or extensive communications with a provider or member may be necessary. Expertise may be required, such as from the plan’s medical staff. A claims specialist or supervisor may take over the claim. 
Sometimes fraud is suspected. Such cases are turned over to a plan’s special investigative unit (SIU), staffed by people trained and experienced in fraudulent schemes and how they can be detected and dealt with. If fraud is in fact detected, an SIU may work with the plan’s legal department or law enforcement agencies.  Regulation 
As mentioned above, HIPAA promotes the electronic transmission of health plan claims in a standardized format. HIPAA also protects the privacy and security of members’ health information while allowing health plans to conduct investigations. In addition, the NAIC Unfair Claims Settlement Practices Act, adopted in whole or in part by many states, sets standards for the handling and investigation of insurance claims. The Act lists certain insurer or health plan actions and defines them as unfair claims practices, and if a plan commits these actions so frequently that they can be considered to constitute a general business practice, the plan is in violation of the Act. A health plan may not conceal from a claimant information relevant to a claim. A plan must promptly acknowledge receipt of a claim and communications related to the claim. It cannot delay paying a claim by asking for redundant or unnecessary information and documentation. It must generally process a clean claim (one that does not require the plan to seek additional information) within 30 days of receipt. It must have reasonable cause to delay adjudication of a claim to conduct an investigation, and an investigation must be finished in 30 days unless it cannot be reasonably completed in that time.  
Conclusion 
Prompt and accurate processing of claims is a key driver of member satisfaction with a health plan, and it is also critical to maintaining good working relationships with providers. Therefore, a successful health plan will select and train its claims personnel and manage its claims department with an eye to providing top-notch service. 

22 Member Services 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• name and describe the four main categories of health plan member services; 
• discuss how health plans manage accessibility, personnel, processes, technology, and performance for member services; and  
• describe several ways in which health plans use technology to facilitate the delivery of member services. 
Member services consist of a broad range of activities that a health plan and its employees engage in to support the delivery of benefits to its members and to keep them satisfied with the plan. Member services typically involve a mix of inbound member contacts (member-initiated requests for information, transactions, services, and assistance with problems) and outbound member contacts (those initiated by the plan). Meeting members’ ongoing service needs in an effective and efficient manner presents a variety of challenges for a health plan. 
In this module we first describe the types of activities that are included in health plan member services and how they are conducted. We then look at how plans manage various aspects of member services to enhance both quality and cost-effectiveness. In both cases, we learn how technology is used to support a plan’s activities. Member Services Activities  
Member services activities generally fall into four main categories: member education; assistance with questions, transactions, and requests; complaint management; and measurement and reporting of member satisfaction. 
Member Education 
Many of the problems that health plan members experience with their coverage arise because they do not understand the plan’s benefits or the requirements for accessing them. The education of members about benefits, cost-sharing, and authorization before they need services can reduce member confusion, leading to fewer telephone calls to the plan to ask questions, fewer complaints, and greater satisfaction when members actually use services. For example, proactive education about a plan’s requirements for authorization of payment can reduce disputes about claims. Many plans also proactively provide members with information about preventive care and other health issues, which can enhance member satisfaction and reduce members’ needs for healthcare services. 
Proactive education programs are often referred to as member outreach programs. 
Outreach programs may focus on administrative information, health information, or both. In many instances, these programs provide general information for the entire plan membership. Typically, members receive information about the plan when they enroll, and information about new programs, plan changes, and health issues is distributed periodically. The types of information that health plans generally distribute to all members include the following:  
• services covered and excluded for different types of care (physician, hospital, emergency, ancillary, drugs, etc.); 
• member responsibilities (paying copayments, deductibles, or coinsurance and obtaining referrals and authorization of payment when required);  services requiring authorization and guidelines for obtaining it;  network providers, their locations and credentials;  differences in benefit levels for in-network and out-of-network care;  the drug formulary; 
• available programs and services (such as screenings, disease management, and telephone triage lines) 
• general health information (on nutrition, exercise, safety, smoking cessation, common illnesses, and disease prevention); and  options for resolving complaints and appealing health plan decisions. 
A health plan may also identify groups of members with a common characteristic, such as age, gender, or a chronic illness, and send them relevant health-related information. For example, a plan might send information on mammogram and Pap test screenings to all adult female members, or information on diabetes management to members with that illness. 
Distributing Information 
Traditionally, health plans have used mass mailings of letters and newsletters to distribute information to members. But today, except when there is a regulatory requirement to notify members by mail of a change, plans more often use websites and email. A website can provide the types of information listed above, as well as answers to frequently asked questions, links to other health websites, and information on healthcare services available in the community. Email or electronic newsletters can be used to welcome new members and provide updates. Social media sites and tools can be used to educate members on benefits or engage them in health and wellness programs. And some health plans use telephone outreach programs to give new members basic plan information and check to see if they have questions or are confused about anything. 
The target audience affects the way educational information should be presented. For instance, members with vision or hearing impairments must be accommodated, Medicare members may need large print, and languages other than English may be required. Accessibility guidelines for websites and online communication should be followed as well as state requirements for communications for government program members. Finally, educational materials must clearly communicate the information in a way that the typical member can understand. For this reason, health plans often conduct marketing research tests (such as focus groups) on their educational tools before finalizing them and making them available to members. 
Assistance with Questions, Transactions, and Requests  
Health plans must also answer members’ questions about administrative, coverage, access, and health issues; assist them with transactions; and respond to other service requests. Some examples of typical member questions and requests are listed in the box below. 
Some Typical Member Questions and Requests 
Administrative issues: 
• The information on my identification card is out of date, and I need a new one. 
• Please send me a new provider directory. 
• My PCP has moved out of the area, so I need to pick a new one. 
• What is the mailing address for submitting a claim? 
Coverage: 
• What benefits do I have for chiropractic treatment? 
• Does the plan pay for prescriptions from out-of-network providers? 
• What portion of the bill will I have to pay for my stay in the hospital when I have surgery? 
• My doctor says I need eyeglasses. Are they covered? 
Access: 
• How do I get authorization for the echocardiogram my cardiologist ordered? 
• Do I need a referral to see a dermatologist? 
• How long does it take the plan to process a request for authorization of payment after a provider has recommended a procedure? 
• What are my options if the plan does not authorize payment for a service recommended by my doctor? 
Health plan programs: 
• Who can I call if I’m not sure what kind of care I need? 
• Does the plan have any programs for expectant mothers? 
• I want information to help me manage my asthma better. 
• What types of preventive care or self-care programs does the plan offer? 
There are a number of means by which health plans can respond to members. Regardless of the communication medium, all inbound and outbound contacts should be tracked to ensure that any follow-up activities are completed and member needs are met. 
Telephone Systems 
Plans generally have toll-free telephone numbers for members to call. A plan may make available the numbers of different departments so that members can directly dial the one they need, or it may have one central number and route calls by means of computer/telephony integration (CTI), a technology that unites a computer system and a telephone system. Two forms of CTI commonly used by health plans are automatic call distributors (ACDs) and interactive voice response (IVR). 
• An automatic call distributor (ACD) answers calls with a recorded message and then routes them to the appropriate unit based on information that the caller enters on the telephone keypad (such as his member identification number) or his phone number. If no representative in the appropriate unit is available, the ACD places the call in a queue to be answered when a representative becomes available. ACDs prevent callers from receiving a busy signal during times of high call volume and expedite their connection to an appropriate representative.  
• An interactive voice response (IVR) system answers calls with recorded or synthesized speech and prompts the caller to respond to a menu of options by entering information through his keypad or speaking. Each response takes the caller to the next appropriate menu until he receives the desired information, hangs up, or speaks to a representative.  
An IVR system can handle many of the questions and requests that in the past required speaking with a member services representative. Some IVR systems even allow selfservice for certain transactions. For example, a series of IVR menus might direct the member through the process required to choose a new PCP, order a provider directory, or check the status of a claim. Another advantage of IVR is that it can handle many calls simultaneously. Members benefit from IVR because it enables them to obtain information at times when member services representatives are not available. 
Mail and Fax 
Letters and other paper documents sent through the mail still account for much of a health plan’s inbound and outbound contact with members. The mail is typically used to deliver important notifications (such as formulary updates and changes in authorization requirements); to respond to complaints or appeals; and to handle many routine transactions (such as premium payments, address changes, claims processing, and explanations of benefits). The extent to which mail systems are automated varies among plans. In some cases a plan may accept documents from members by fax.  
Email 
Email is an important means of communicating with members. A plan needs an internal tool that allows categorization and tracking of messages and a knowledge base that can be used to answer the most frequent questions. Member service representatives need training in proper procedures. HIPAA requirements for protecting patient information (discussed in a later module) apply, and secure messaging or email encryption may be required. 
Online 
Many health plan websites enable members to access their accounts by entering a company-issued user ID or password and conduct certain transactions, such as changing their address, adding new family members to coverage, selecting a new PCP, obtaining forms, or filing claims. A website may also allow a member to communicate with a member services representative by means of online chat. With a click-to-callback feature, a member can request a call from a service representative, either immediately or at a scheduled time.  
A health plan may want to consider providing technical support for members having difficulty using its website, including co-browsing, where the member services representative shares the view of the member’s screen in order to assist him. Also, people are increasingly accessing the Internet through mobile devices instead of desktop computers, and health plans need to address this change. Already, applications such as provider searches and prescription information are in use, and many more will no doubt become available. 
Complaint Management  
Despite a health plan’s best efforts, some members will disagree with certain actions or decisions taken by the plan or its providers. Such disagreements often result in members’ complaints about plan coverage, access to services, medical services received, nonclinical service from providers or their staff, or service from a health plan department. Many complaints stem from the authorization process and decisions.  
Examples of Member Complaints 
Complaints about the plan: 
• The person I talked to in claims was rude and wouldn’t answer my question. 
• The doctor told me I need to start physical therapy as soon as possible, but the plan hasn’t authorized payment yet. 
• The plan’s procedures for getting authorization for payment are too complicated and confusing. 
• If this medical procedure is listed as a covered service and my doctor says I need it, the plan should pay for it. 
• I have to select a PCP, but none of the network PCPs near me is accepting new patients. 
Complaints about providers: 
• When I call for an appointment with a rheumatologist, the earliest time available for a new patient is two months away. 
• The doctor was in a big rush and did not explain my problem in a way I could understand. 
• My PCP does not return my phone calls. 
• On my last visit to my doctor, I had to wait over an hour before I was seen. 
• My PCP’s office is too far away from my home, and there’s never any parking available nearby. 
• I don’t think my doctor prescribed the right treatment for my illness. 
• My PCP’s office lost the results of the blood tests they did during my last visit.  The staff at my doctor’s office is more concerned with their own personal problems that the reason for my visit. 
• The hospital you sent me to didn’t have the right equipment to treat my condition. 
There are a number of reasons health plans must adequately address member complaints. First, there are generally regulatory requirements governing the resolution of complaints that health plans must comply with. Also, unresolved complaints lead to member dissatisfaction and can result in negative publicity—especially today with the popularity of social media and websites in which consumers comment on and rate businesses. Finally, unresolved complaints may evolve into appeals, requiring more time and resources. For all these reasons, even if a complaint is considered to be unjustified, the member’s perception that he has not been treated correctly needs to be addressed. 
Complaint Resolution Procedures 
Health plans establish complaint resolution procedures (CRPs) to address informal complaints, such as those made by phone or in a letter, as well as formal appeals, which occur when an informal complaint is not resolved to a member’s satisfaction. Many states have laws regarding CRPs; these vary from state to state, but they typically require plans to inform all members about procedures for complaints, track and report complaints, respond to complaints within a certain time, and give members the option of an independent external review when internal reviews are exhausted. At the federal level, employer-sponsored health plans must meet the appeal requirements of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), and the Affordable Care Act (healthcare reform) also includes rules in this area. Finally, accrediting agencies have standards for handling member complaints and appeals, which address documentation and investigation of complaints, notification of members about rights to appeal, qualifications of persons who review appeals, timeframes for appeals, notification of involved parties about appeal decisions, and members’ rights to independent external review. 
The Appeal Process  
In a formal appeal, a dispute is reviewed and resolved by a party other than the person who made the initial decision or performed the service that led to the complaint. The appeal process follows established procedures and typically includes at least two levels. 
• In a level one appeal, a medical director or other officer of the health plan reviews the original decision and any additional supporting information submitted by the complaining member and either upholds or overturns the decision. If the decision is upheld, the member has the right to go to the next level. 
• Level two appeals are generally handled by a health plan appeals committee, typically consisting of representatives of various areas within the plan, such as utilization review, member services, health plan operations, and legal affairs (and sometimes plan members). If the appeal involves a medical issue, the committee includes a physician. The committee reviews all of the relevant documentation on the complaint and the previous appeal and collects new information as necessary before upholding or overturning the decision. 
A health plan’s CRPs specify maximum timeframes for conducting each level of appeal. There are also procedures for expedited appeals when following the standard time limits might endanger the member’s health. Many states require an expedited appeal process for pre-authorization denials based on the plan’s decision that the treatment is not medically necessary or experimental.  
After she has exhausted a health plan’s internal appeal process, a member may be able to pursue other avenues. 
• Mediation or arbitration. In mediation an impartial person experienced in dispute resolution works with the member and the plan to help them come to an agreement acceptable to both. Arbitration is similar, but the mediator’s decision is final and binding on both parties. 
• Government agencies. Laws vary by state, but a member may be able to appeal to the state insurance or health department. Members of a plan under the Federal Employees Health Benefit (FEHB) system can appeal to the federal Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and Medicare beneficiaries can appeal to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 
• Independent external review is conducted by a third party that is not affiliated with the health plan or a providers’ association and has no conflict of interest or stake in the outcome of the review, often an independent review organization (IRO), a company specializing in this area. It may involve mediation or a binding decision. Some states require that members have the option of an independent external review after they have exhausted the internal appeals process. 
Member Satisfaction Measurement and Reporting  
Member satisfaction is, of course, critical to a health plan’s success and survival. If a plan cannot maintain high levels of overall satisfaction and improve areas that members find unsatisfactory, members are likely to disenroll. Member satisfaction is also important for maintaining the plan’s positive image in publications that rate the performance of health plans and in the general media. 
Measurements of member satisfaction help a plan understand which of its services work well and which need improvement. These measurements are compared to plan, industry, and external standards and are tracked over time to identify trends. Generally, a health plan considers its members’ satisfaction with the following: the plan as a whole, access to healthcare services (both the availability of providers and referral and authorization rules), the quality of healthcare, the quality of nonclinical services (from both the plan and its providers), and the plan’s administration (member services, claims, billing, and authorization systems). The two primary ways of measuring member satisfaction are member satisfaction surveys and complaint monitoring. 
Member Satisfaction Surveys  
Member satisfaction surveys can be conducted by phone, mail, or email, or online. There are several types.  
• Plans often survey members at a specified interval following contact with a provider. For example, a plan might contact members who recently had procedures performed at a hospital and ask these sorts of questions: How understandable was authorization process? Was it conducted in a timely manner? Did any problems occur? How satisfactory was the medical care received? How about the nonclinical services? How clean and well-equipped were the facilities? What could the health plan or the hospital staff have done to make your experience better? 
• Plans periodically survey a sample of the entire member population. This is done to measure the satisfaction of all members, not just those who have received healthcare services recently. Members who rarely need care cost the plan little, so it is important to ensure that they are happy and will remain members. 
• A plan may also survey former members to determine why they left and get their input about the plan’s benefits, medical care, and costs. 
• Ongoing feedback mechanisms and online surveys are also conducted to determine the effectiveness of a plan’s website and other online communication channels such as email, mobile, and chat.  
Member satisfaction surveys may be conducted by member services employees or outside companies. Some accreditation programs and purchasers require health plans to use third parties for this. Perhaps the best-known third-party member satisfaction survey is the CAHPS survey mentioned in the module on quality standards. The core questions of the CAHPS survey cover specific aspects of customer service and overall measures of consumer experience with the plan. The CAHPS system provides questionnaires, directions for conducting surveys and reporting results, and sample formats for reports of results. 
Complaint Monitoring 
Member services personnel document, track, and report member complaints. Complaints are categorized by type (enabling the plan to determine how widespread a problem is) and by the plan department or provider involved (to identify the source of a problem). Periodic reports are generated, which managers can use to identify problems, assess their extent and seriousness, investigate and resolve them, and track them over time. 
Complaints often lead not only to improving unsatisfactory performance by plan and provider personnel, but also to changes in a plan’s services and procedures. For instance, if a plan receives numerous complaints that its authorizations procedures are confusing, it might rewrite the information it gives members about these procedures to make them clearer, or it might even change the procedures themselves to make them simpler and easier to follow. Likewise, in response to member feedback a plan might add benefits or programs, such as coverage of alternative treatments such as acupuncture or massage therapy or a mail-order drug program. 
Managing Member Services 
Structure 
Some health plans have a dedicated member services department, but in others the personnel of several departments (such as claims, enrollment, and account management) provide function-specific services directly to members. Plans with defined networks, authorization systems, and a variety of programs to manage quality and utilization (such as HMOs and POS plans) typically have a separate member services department because they receive a large volume of inquiries and service requests from members. Plans with fewer network and medical management programs (such as PPOs) often handle member services through multiple departments. However, large and medium-sized plans of any type may find that the volume of their members’ service needs justifies having a dedicated member services unit.  
Some health plans with separate member services departments have within them specialized units that focus on specific products, such as a company’s HMO or PPO product or its Medicare or Medicaid plan. Some plans have specialized units for particular accounts, such as large employers or government purchasers. This approach allows member services representatives to develop expertise about a manageable number of products or customer groups, enabling them to be more responsive to a population’s needs and to serve it more effectively and efficiently. 
A plan may also divide its member services representatives into work groups that specialize in different means of communication, such as telephone, mail, email, or website. Or they may be divided by function, such as claims or authorization. However, it is not uncommon for all member services representatives to handle many types of needs through different communication channels. 
Goals 
Health plans want employees to demonstrate the following attributes in interacting with members:  

• Competence—providing information, answering questions, completing transactions, and resolving problems accurately and in a timely manner. 
• Strong communication skills—being articulate, listening effectively for expressed and unexpressed needs, and posing questions and responding to members clearly and relevantly. 
• Professional demeanor—being friendly, respectful, courteous, and willing to meet the needs of the individual members, even when those members are upset or angry. 
• Empathy—being able to understand the member’s emotional state and see the situation from her perspective. Empathy and compassion are important because employees often have contact with members who are in emotional crises because their own illness or the illness of a family member. 
Health plans also have to consider cost when designing and delivering member services. To achieve both quality and cost-effectiveness goals, a health plan must manage accessibility, personnel, processes, technology, and performance, as discussed below.  
Accessibility 
Accessibility is the ease and convenience with which members can obtain services. It depends on the communication channels offered (telephone, mail, email, and website), the hours of operation for each channel, and staffing levels.  
Ideally, a health plan would make all channels available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year to maximize convenience. But for channels that require the participation of employees, this is usually not cost-effective. More commonly, member services representatives are available only during the plan’s standard business hours, or sometimes an hour or two before and after standard hours and for limited hours during the weekend. During off-hours, self-service channels such as IVR or websites are available, and while they do not offer the full range of services, they are providing more and more information and transactions.  
For communication channels that involve employees, accessibility is affected by staffing levels. Obviously, the more employees available, the shorter the delay, such as telephone hold time, before a member receives a response. Health plans strive to staff member services at a level that achieves adequate service without leaving employees frequently idle, based on the usual volume of member contacts for different days and times.  
How many member services representatives are needed to achieve an adequate level of 
service for a certain volume of contacts? This depends on representatives’ responsibilities, the nature of the plan, and the availability of self-service options and members’ willingness to use them. A broad scope of responsibilities, an active outreach program, a complex benefit structure, and complicated authorization requirements can increase the number of staff needed. On the other hand, the effective use of computer and telephone technology can improve the productivity and effectiveness of representatives, thereby reducing staffing needs. 
Personnel  
Selecting the right people to be member service representatives and training them appropriately are critical for maintaining high quality and efficiency. Hiring processes and selection tools vary, but health plans generally have both aptitude and attitude requirements. Member services representatives must have an aptitude for learning new information rapidly and using a computer and phone simultaneously, and their attitudes should include friendliness, the desire to help, and comfort in dealing with a steady stream of requests. 
The initial training of representatives is typically extensive, often requiring two or more months before the new employee is ready to handle member contacts independently. New representatives generally receive instruction on a variety of topics and skills, including plan products, procedures, computer and telephone systems, general principles of customer service, sensitivity training, active listening, problem-solving, dispute resolution, and handling angry customers. Ongoing training may introduce new skills or areas of knowledge or refresh existing skills. To help employees assimilate this wide range of knowledge and skills, health plans often use a mix of training methods, such as classroom instruction, simulated contact with members, and on-the-job training with mentoring. 
People who provide customer service all day, every day, are subject to stress and “burnout,” so a plan faces challenges in motivating and retaining member services representatives. Managers often develop recognition and incentive programs to reward staff members for good performance. Many plans conduct contests on an individual or team basis to encourage improved performance. It is also important to provide a supportive, pleasant workplace and opportunities for professional development and career advancement. 
Processes 
There are many member services processes, including fulfilling requests for provider directories, explaining benefits for different types of services, changing a member’s PCP, assisting members with requests for authorization of payment, investigating and responding to claims inquiries, placing welcome calls to new members, and handling complaints. A health plan’s processes must be both effective and efficient—that is, they must achieve their objectives while making good use of company resources, particularly time. Standard processes must be clearly established, employees trained in them, and adherence to them monitored. And because a plan’s products and member needs change over time, processes should be periodically reviewed and modified. 
Technology  
The effective use of technology can enhance the performance of member services personnel and processes. Information management systems provide the information employees need to help members. Communication technology connects the member to the representative or other source of information quickly and accurately. CTI improves employee productivity and accuracy by linking the information and communication systems so that employees have immediate access to information about individual members. CTI systems that record telephone calls for later quality review and track the volume of calls by type facilitate performance management. 
The types of technology and the ways they are applied vary greatly by plan and are continually evolving. IVR systems and websites are being enhanced to enable members to perform some routine transactions. Decreasing the number of routine requests that go to member services representatives increases the availability of representatives for more complex questions and needs. And with the use of online chat, somewhat more complicated matters can be handled online, sometimes more cost-effectively. 
Performance 
Performance management addresses both the quality and the cost-effectiveness of member services. For quality, in addition to the member satisfaction surveys and complaint reports mentioned above, health plans evaluate certain statistics on member contacts, including the following: 
• Turn-around time—the amount of time required to complete a particular member-initiated transaction. 
• First contact resolution rate—the percentage of questions that are answered, requests that are fulfilled, and transactions that are processed and completed at the initial point of contact. First contact resolution is also colloquially called “one and done customer service.” 
• Wait time—the average amount of time that members stay on the telephone before they receive assistance.  
• Call abandonment rate—how often members who are put on hold hang up before receiving assistance. Typically, a shorter wait time results in a lower call abandonment rate. 
• Error rate—the accuracy of information given and transactions processed. 
Many health plans also analyze and even score the quality of individual episodes of contact between members and employees. Managers may monitor live or recorded telephone calls to check for accuracy of information, communication skills, courtesy, and empathy. 
For cost-effectiveness, measures typically focus on the productivity of individuals, teams, or entire units. CTI applications enable plans to monitor and track a variety of productivity indicators, such as the number of telephone calls, emails, or letters handled in a particular time period; the average amount of time spent on each customer contact; and the amount of time spent on administrative duties, such as documentation of contacts, research, and follow-up activities. The first contact resolution rate is an indication of cost-effectiveness as well as of quality, since when members’ needs are met in their first call they do not have to call again.  
Health plans also measure the quality and cost-effectiveness of their websites, by means of member satisfaction surveys, the number of visitors and page views, and path analysis.  
After collecting performance data, managers compare it to service levels, standards set by the plan. For example, the service level for wait time might be that at least 75 percent of calls are answered by a representative within 20 seconds of hold time. Health plans typically base their service levels on company or industry benchmarks, but some purchasers have their own requirements. 
To increase member satisfaction, some health plans are focusing more on improving quality service levels even if this results a worsening of cost-effectiveness service levels. For example, a plan might encourage representatives dealing with complaints to take the time to be empathetic, acknowledge the complaint, explore the issue, and take appropriate action to resolve the complaint during the initial contact, even if this results in the average time required for each contact increasing. 

23 Federal Laws and Regulation 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• tell how federal antitrust and financial services legislation affects health plans, 
• identify and describe the most important federal laws governing employee benefits and health plans, and  summarize the main provisions of HIPAA. 
Like all business entities, health plans are subject to a variety of general business laws and regulations addressing issues such as trade practices, consumer protection, employment and hiring practices, workplace health and safety, contract negotiations, and taxation. In addition, as providers and financers of healthcare services, health plans are subject to laws and regulations specific to healthcare. In this module we examine some of the key federal laws and regulations that affect health plans. In the next module we discuss the latest major piece of federal legislation in this area, the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA), commonly called healthcare reform. And in later modules we study state laws and regulations and laws and regulations related to government healthcare benefit programs.  
General Business Legislation 
The federal government plays an important role in regulating business activities in order to protect the marketplace and consumers. Many federal laws and regulations do not specifically address health plans but nonetheless have a significant impact on their structure and operations. These include antitrust and financial services legislation. 
Antitrust Legislation 
Antitrust laws are designed to protect competition from unlawful restraints of trade, such as price-fixing, market allocation, and bid-rigging. The antitrust laws also prohibit unlawful acquisition or maintenance of monopoly power. The three main federal antitrust laws are these:1 
• The Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 established as national policy the concept of a competitive marketing system. The Act prohibits companies from attempting to monopolize any part of trade or commerce or to engage in contracts, combinations, or conspiracies in restraint of trade. The Act applies to all companies engaged in interstate or foreign commerce.  
• The Clayton Act of 1914 forbids certain actions believed to lead to monopolies. 
These include charging different purchasers different prices for the same product without justification and allowing a distributor to sell a product only if it agrees not to sell competitors’ products. The Clayton Act applies to insurance companies only to the extent that state laws do not regulate such activities.  
• The Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914 established the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and gave it power to work with the Department of Justice to enforce the Clayton Act. The primary function of the FTC is to prevent unfair competition and deceptive business practices, which are presented broadly in the Act. As a result the FTC also pursues violators of the Sherman Antitrust Act.  
Antitrust laws also exist at the state level.  
Antitrust Violations  
Health plans and healthcare providers may be found in violation of antitrust laws if they engage in any of the following activities: 
• Price-fixing involves the agreement by two or more independent entities on the prices that they will charge or pay for services. For example, independent providers generally may not collectively establish the fees that each will charge a health plan. A price-fixing violation need not involve a strict agreement on prices—for instance, it could entail agreement on terms of trade or price levels. 
• A horizontal group boycott occurs when two competitors agree not to do business with another competitor or purchaser. For example, two independent hospitals generally may not agree to refuse to contract with a health plan until the health plan ceases contract negotiations with another hospital. 
• Tying arrangements occur when an organization conditions the sale or purchase of one product or service on the sale or purchase of other products or services. For example, a specialty provider group contracting with a health plan for oncology services generally may be prohibited from requiring the health plan to contract with the group for other services as a condition for receiving the group’s oncology services.  
• Horizontal allocation or division of markets occurs when two or more organizations agree not to compete by dividing geographic marketing areas, product offerings, or customers. For example, two independent companies generally may not split purchasers into two groups and each agree to market their products to only one group.  
Provider contracting is an area in which antitrust issues sometimes arise. Generally speaking, contracting with a select network of providers does not raise antitrust issues (although some states have limited this through any willing provider laws mentioned in Module 13). However, some contract terms, such as exclusive contracts may, raise antitrust issues, depending on the specific facts and circumstances of the market. 
Financial Services Legislation 
In 1999 Congress enacted the Financial Services Modernization Act, referred to as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley (GLB) Act, which allows convergence among the traditionally separate components of the financial services industry—banks, securities firms, and insurance companies. Because health plans finance the delivery of healthcare services, they are also considered part of the financial services industry. 
In broad terms the GLB Act stipulates how the financial services industry may be structured and how it is regulated and supervised. The GLB Act also establishes the rights of customers in regard to the protection of the privacy of personal financial information. 
• All financial institutions must disclose their privacy policies regarding the sharing of nonpublic personal information with both affiliates and third parties. Such disclosure must take place at the time of establishing a customer relationship and not less than annually as long as the relationship continues. 
• They must notify customers of any sharing of nonpublic personal information with nonaffiliated third parties.  
• They must provide customers with an opportunity to opt-out of sharing nonpublic personal information subject to certain limited exceptions.2 
Although the GLB Act does not specifically target healthcare organizations, it may have consequences for these organizations. For example, the GLB Act called on regulators in the states to enact laws governing specific financial services entities, and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) responded by proposing a Privacy of Consumer Financial and Health Information Model Regulation to govern the activities of healthcare organizations and insurers. State regulations based on the NAIC Model Regulation (discussed in the next module) affect the way healthcare organizations, insurers, and other users share protected health information. 
Employee Benefit and Healthcare Legislation 
Several federal laws govern how employers provide healthcare benefits to their employees and how health plans provide insurance coverage or administer employee benefits. We will discuss a number of these laws in this section, and then in a separate section we will examine a major federal healthcare law, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). And as noted earlier, in the next module we will study the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA). 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) 
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) is a broad law that establishes the rights of health plan and pension plan participants, standards for the investment of plan assets, and requirements for the disclosure of plan provisions and funding. ERISA applies to all employer-sponsored or union-sponsored health and pension plans. 
ERISA contains strict reporting and disclosure requirements. Employers and plan fiduciaries—that is, persons or organizations that hold, manage, and have discretionary authority over money belonging to another person or organization—must prepare and distribute summary plan descriptions and file reports with the Department of Labor and the Internal Revenue Service. 
Preemption 
One of the most significant features of ERISA is its preemption provision, stipulating that ERISA generally takes precedence over any state laws that regulate employee welfare benefit plans. However, the preemption provision leaves to the states the authority to regulate insurance, banking, and securities. Consequently, state insurance laws (such as those relating to policy provisions, group size, group eligibility, and mandated benefits) apply to health insurance coverage provided to an employee benefit plan but do not apply directly to the plan. This is true regardless of whether the plan is fully funded (fully insured) or self-funded (self-insured). (Recall that in a self-funded plan the employer, rather than a health plan or insurance company, is financially responsible for paying claims and related expenses.) 
Example: Alpine Corporation is self-funded—that is, it provides health benefits to its employees itself, with no insurance company involvement. Alpine’s health plan is subject to ERISA but not to state laws and regulations governing insurance. On the other hand, Piedmont, Inc. is fully insured; its employee health plan is provided by 
Delta Insurance Company. Piedmont’s involvement in its plan is subject to ERISA, and in addition Delta’s involvement in the plan is subject to state insurance laws and regulations. 
The preemption provision encourages employers to create employee benefit plans by providing a uniform system of regulation and oversight. Furthermore, under ERISA selffunded plans are exempt from state taxes on insurers’ premium revenues.  ERISA’s preemption provision also has important implications for health plans, especially in cases in which an employee raises questions about a plan’s decision not to authorize benefit payment based on medical necessity or appropriateness. Under ERISA, persons who receive healthcare benefits through employee benefit plans must file legal challenges involving coverage decisions or plan administration at the federal level, and ERISA is generally the governing law for such cases. 
For health plans the major advantage of having cases tried at the federal rather than the state level is that, unlike most state laws, ERISA limits damage awards in lawsuits to the cost of the medical services or treatment. It does not allow plan members to receive additional compensatory damages or punitive damages. For example, suppose a plan member files a lawsuit against a health plan in federal court on the grounds that the health plan’s decision to deny payment of benefits on the basis of a lack of medical necessity was improper. If the court determines that benefits were improperly denied, the plan member can recover the denied benefits. The plan member cannot receive monetary awards in compensation for her pain and suffering or awards designed to deter health plans from making inappropriate coverage decisions in the future. 
A number of court cases have challenged health plans’ ability to invoke the ERISA preemption, and proposals have been made to eliminate the preemption or to allow plan members to sue health plans in state court and receive additional compensatory and punitive damages. However, in June 2004 the U.S. Supreme Court issued a decision in the consolidated case of Aetna Health Inc. v. Davila and CIGNA HealthCare of Texas, Inc. v. Calad. The Court’s decision unanimously upheld the ERISA preemption, affirming that Congress intended ERISA’s framework to be the exclusive means of challenging coverage decisions and that individuals cannot challenge such decision in state courts. 
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 (COBRA) 
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 (COBRA) addresses the continuation of group health coverage after an individual’s normal eligibility ends. COBRA requires group health plans to allow employees and dependents to continue their coverage for a certain amount of time following the loss of eligibility, if that loss is caused by a qualifying event. Qualifying events include the termination of employment, reduced work hours, and the death or divorce of an employee.  
Generally, COBRA applies to businesses with 20 or more employees. Many states have similar requirements for businesses with fewer than 20 employees (so-called “mini COBRA” laws). 
The plan administrator of a group health plan must notify covered individuals of their rights under COBRA when they become covered under the plan and when a qualifying event occurs. When a qualifying event occurs, the affected individuals have a specified time within which they can elect to continue their group health benefits.  
Following termination or reduction in hours, an employee, his or her spouse, and dependent children can continue coverage for up to 18 months. If an employee dies or is divorced or legally separated, his or her spouse and dependent children can continue coverage for up to 36 months. A dependent child who ceases to be an eligible dependent under a group health plan can continue coverage for up to 36 months. Once an employee or dependent obtains other group health coverage (for example, through new employment), coverage under COBRA ceases.  
The continuation coverage under COBRA must be identical to the regular coverage under the health plan. The employee normally pays the full cost of the continuation coverage, and the plan administrator may also charge an administrative fee of 2 percent of this cost. Employers are not required to pay any portion of cost. 
HMO Act of 1973 
As you recall from earlier modules, the HMO Act of 1973 and its amendments were instrumental in defining the structure and operations of HMOs and paved the way for HMOs to enter the healthcare market. The HMO Act also sets the requirements HMOs must satisfy to become federally qualified. These requirements cover the following four basic operational areas: 
• Benefits. Federally qualified HMOs must offer a comprehensive benefit package that includes outpatient and inpatient services, unlimited home healthcare benefits, and outpatient behavioral healthcare. HMOs are allowed to deliver these services only through staff or group models, individual practice associations (IPAs), or direct contract arrangements. Benefit structures must require only minimal copayments by members.  
• Enrollment. Qualified HMOs must enroll individuals eligible for group coverage without regard to health status.  
• Financing. Qualified HMOs must have a fiscally sound operation and adequate protections against insolvency.  
• Quality assurance. Qualified HMOs must establish ongoing quality assurance programs that meet the requirements of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). These programs must stress outcomes and performance review of services by physicians and other healthcare professionals.  
Although federal qualification is voluntary and is less important in today's market than in the past, many HMOs still maintain their federal qualification status. 
Other Laws 
A number of other federal laws have an impact on health plans. A few of the most important are shown in Figure 23.1.  
Figure 23.1 
Some Federal Laws That Affect Healthcare Organizations3 
Legislative Act 
Who Must Comply 
Protected Class 
Effect on Healthcare 
Age 
Discrimination in 
Employment Act 
(ADEA) 
Employers with 20 or more employees 
Employees age 40 and older 
All active employees, regardless of age, must be eligible for the same healthcare coverages, and older employees cannot be charged more than younger ones. 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act 
Employers with 15 or more employees and engaged in interstate 
commerce 
All employees 
Discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin is prohibited. Employers must ensure that health plan provisions are not discriminatory.  
Pregnancy 
Discrimination Act 
(amendment to 
Civil Rights Act) 
Employers with 15 or more employees and engaged in interstate 
commerce 
All employees 
Employer-sponsored group health plans must provide coverage for pregnancy, childbirth, and related conditions on the same basis as for other medical conditions. 
Family and 
Medical Leave Act 
(FMLA) 
Employers with 50 or more employees 
Employees who 
are ill, need to care 
for a seriously ill family member, or have a new child (including adopted)  
Employees must be allowed to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. Employers must continue to make group health benefits available 



during this leave. 
 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) imposes requirements on employer-sponsored and union-sponsored group insurance plans and insurance companies that provide coverage in the group and individual markets. HIPAA provisions are divided into two main categories:  
• Title I contains provisions designed to increase the availability and continuity of healthcare coverage for persons in the individual and group markets. 
• Title II mandates administrative simplification standards designed to protect the confidentiality of health information and facilitate data exchange among entities that finance and deliver healthcare services. 
Almost all states have enacted laws that mirror the requirements of Title I of HIPAA. In states with protections at least as stringent as those of HIPAA, state regulators enforce these state laws. In states that have not developed acceptable provisions, HIPAA protections apply and are enforced by the federal government. 
Title I: Availability and Continuity of Healthcare Coverage  
Individual Coverage Provisions 
Title I of HIPAA guarantees the availability of health insurance coverage for individuals who meet certain qualifications. All such qualified individuals who apply for individual insurance coverage from a private insurer or a state high-risk pool (depending on state law) must be issued a policy automatically, without a medical examination and regardless of preexisting conditions. 
In general, to qualify for HIPAA guaranteed individual issue a person must meet these requirements: She recently had at least 18 months of health coverage (group or individual insurance or a public program such as Medicare or Medicaid), her most recent coverage was group coverage, and she is currently ineligible for either group coverage or coverage under a public program. An individual who loses group coverage because he changes jobs and his new employer does not provide healthcare coverage may also qualify for guaranteed individual issue.  
Group Coverage Provisions  
Title I of HIPAA also includes key group healthcare coverage provisions, including limitations on the use of preexisting condition exclusions, guaranteed availability of coverage for small groups, guaranteed renewability of coverage for all groups, and special enrollment periods for certain individuals (such as newborns or adopted children).  
Title I of HIPAA ensures that individuals are not denied healthcare coverage or charged more for that coverage by a group plan because of their health status (defined to include an individual’s health status, medical conditions, treatment history, claims experience, and genetic information). Group plans and insurers also may not apply waiting periods, cost-sharing mechanisms, or other eligibility rules in a way that that discriminates against individuals on the basis of health status. 
Title I of HIPAA has been amended by subsequent acts that create additional protections for individuals with group healthcare coverage. These include the following: 
• The Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 (MHPA) prohibits group health plans or insurers that provide coverage to businesses with more than 50 employees from applying more restrictive annual and lifetime limits on coverage for mental illness than for physical illness. It should be clarified that MHPA does not require health plans to offer mental health coverage, but it imposes requirements on those plans that do so. This law has been amended to expand the parity requirements to any financial requirement or treatment limitation that may be imposed by a health plan or insurer. 
• The Newborns’ and Mothers’ Health Protection Act of 1996 (NMHPA) specifies that group health plans or group healthcare insurers cannot require that hospital stays following childbirth be shorter than 48 hours for normal deliveries or 96 hours for cesarean births. NMHPA does not require group plans and insurers to offer maternity hospitalization benefits, but it imposes requirements on those group plans and insurers that do so. 
• The Women’s Health and Cancer Rights Act of 1998 (WHCRA) requires health plans (both group and individual coverage) that offer medical and surgical benefits for mastectomy to provide coverage for reconstructive surgery following mastectomy. Again, the law does not require group plans and insurers to offer mastectomy benefits, but it imposes requirements on those that do so.  
Title II: Administrative Simplification 
Title II of HIPAA requires the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to develop administrative simplification standards. Some of these are designed to standardize electronic healthcare transactions, such as claims and eligibility inquiries. Others are intended to ensure the privacy and security of individually identifiable health information (health information that, by itself or in conjunction with other available information, identifies an individual). HHS has developed a number of regulations that establish Title II administrative simplification standards. 
These standards apply to health plans, healthcare providers that use electronic transactions, and healthcare clearinghouses. A healthcare clearinghouse is a private or public entity that converts provider data into the correct format for each health plan and converts health plan data into the appropriate provider format. The clearinghouse also sorts and transmits all data. Billing services, repricing companies, community health management information systems, and value added networks may be healthcare clearinghouses.  
Electronic Transaction Standards and Code Sets  
As required by HIPAA, HHS has developed regulations that standardize the form and content of electronic healthcare transactions. Transactions subject to these standards include: healthcare claims or encounter data, health plan eligibility inquiries and responses, provider referrals and authorizations, claims status inquiries and responses, health plan enrollment and disenrollment requests, claim payment and remittance, health plan premium payment, coordination of benefits information, and healthcare claims attachments.  
HHS has identified existing industry format standards and code sets, such as the ICD-9CM diagnosis codes and CPT-4 procedure codes, that must be used when conducting electronic healthcare transactions. HHS has also created a new system in which all healthcare providers apply for a National Provider Identifier (NPI) to be used for electronic transactions, replacing the various provider identifiers used by different health plans.  
Privacy and Security Standards  
HIPAA requires HHS to develop standards to ensure the privacy and security of health information. These standards control the use and disclosure of health information by health plans, healthcare providers, and healthcare clearinghouses, and they provide individuals with certain rights with respect to their information. The privacy standards include the following rules: 
• Healthcare providers must generally obtain an individual’s written consent to use protected health information. Health plans, healthcare providers, and clearinghouses may use or disclose healthcare information for their own treatment, payment, or operations without obtaining the individual’s consent.  
• The transmission of individually identifiable health information for purposes other than medical treatment, payment, or healthcare operations without the patient’s written authorization is generally prohibited. 
• Patients are allowed to access their medical records and request amendment of incorrect or incomplete medical information.  
• Patients are allowed to request that restrictions be placed on the accessibility and use of protected health information.  
• Healthcare providers, healthcare clearinghouses, and health plans must institute privacy and security policies and procedures and workforce training programs.  
• Healthcare providers, health plans, and healthcare clearinghouses must institute privacy protections in contracts with any business that uses health information on their behalf. 
HIPAA security standards are designed to prevent unintended access to protected health information and mandate features entities must include in their operations to ensure that such information is secure. These features include administrative procedures and physical devices and mechanisms to protect data integrity and confidentiality. The security standards are “scalable”—that is, the procedures and mechanisms used by a particular entity may vary depending on the size, structure, 

security needs, and business requirements of the entity. The HIPAA Privacy Rule requires covered entities to: 
• ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of all electronic protected health information (EPHI) that the covered entity creates, receives, maintains, or transmits;  
• protect against any reasonably anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such information;  
• protect against any reasonably anticipated uses or disclosures of such information that are not permitted or required by the Privacy Rule; and  
• ensure compliance by its workforce and any business that contracts with the covered entity.  
Conclusion 
There are many federal laws that have a significant impact on health plans, and we have looked briefly at some of the most important: 
• Under antitrust laws, health plans must not engage in activities that restrain a free, competitive marketplace, such as price-fixing and market allocation. 
• Under financial services legislation, plans must protect the privacy of consumers’ financial information. 
• ERISA governs employer-sponsored health plans, establishing participant rights, investment standards, and disclosure requirements. ERISA also exempts employer plans (but not insurers) from state regulation. 
• COBRA gives employees and dependents certain rights to continue employersponsored health coverage for a time after they lose eligibility.  
• The HMO Act of 1973 sets standards for HMOs that choose to be federally qualified. 
• Under various laws, employers may not discriminate among employees based on race, age, gender, and similar factors in regard to health coverage. 
• HIPAA contains many provisions designed to increase the availability and continuity of healthcare coverage, protect health information, and facilitate data exchange. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  Adapted from Sharon B. Allen, Dennis W. Goodwin, and Jennifer W. Herrod, Life and Health Insurance Marketing, 2nd Ed., LOMA, 1998. Used with permission, all rights reserved.  
Page 
                                                                                                                                                 
2  Financial Services Modernization Act (Gramm-Leach-Bliley), Summary of Provisions, www.senate.gov/. 3  Adapted from Harriett. E. Jones and Dani L. Long, Principles of Insurance: Life, Health, and Annuities, 2nd Ed., LOMA, 1999. Used with permission, all rights reserved. 
Page 
24 The Affordable Care Act 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
• list the main elements of the new healthcare system to be created by the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA);  summarize ACA’s requirements for individuals, employers, and health plans; and 
• describe the subsidies and exchanges to be created by ACA to help people afford health coverage. 
In March 2010 Congress enacted the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), often referred to as the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and commonly called simply healthcare reform. This legislation will have a major impact on health plans. In earlier modules we mentioned some of the Act’s provisions relevant to aspects of health plans under discussion, and in this module we offer a very broad overview of the Act.  
An Important Note 
 The discussion of ACA in this course is not comprehensive. We briefly describe in general terms the main components of this very complex and lengthy legislation, with a focus on the elements that affect health plans. We do not cover all of the provisions of the legislation, which is hundreds of pages long, and for the provisions that we do address, we do not include all details and exceptions.  
 The new system and rules are evolving. Many details and important matters still remain to be decided as the law is interpreted, clarified, and implemented over the next few years. This module is based on what is known in late 2010. Students are encouraged to visit our website (www.ahip.org.) for developments. 
The New Healthcare Financing System 
ACA creates a new healthcare system based on the following elements: 
• Most people will be required to have health coverage or pay a tax penalty. 
• To make health coverage more available, employers will be given incentives to sponsor it, in the form of taxes and tax credits. 
• Also to ensure that coverage is available, health insurance exchanges will be established through which individuals and employers can purchase policies from insurers. 
• To make health coverage more affordable, government subsidies will be provided to some people to help them pay premiums and cost-sharing. 

• The poorest people will be covered by the Medicaid program. As will be discussed in a module that follows, Medicaid eligibility will be expanded to people who are not currently eligible but whose income is below a certain level. 
• To ensure that health coverage adequately meets people’s needs, several new requirements will apply to health plans.  
In addition, there are a number of provisions that will affect taxation, Medicare, long-term care, and HSAs, FSAs, and HRAs, as well as new regulations and programs designed to improve the quality of care and hold down costs. Most of the major components of this new system will become operational in 2014, but some provisions go into effect earlier or later.  
The Individual Mandate 
As of 2014 U.S. citizens and resident aliens will be required to have health coverage that meets minimum standards or pay a federal income tax penalty (with some exceptions). This penalty will be phased in from 2014 to 2016, at which time the annual amount will be the greater of $695 per person or 2.5 percent of income (modified adjusted gross income or MAGI). For families the flat penalty amount is $695 for each family member 18 and older and half that for each child under 18, but no family will have to pay more than three times the per-person amount ($2,085). It should be emphasized that the money paid is a tax penalty—it is not a health insurance premium, and it does not entitle the payer to any health coverage. 
Employer-Sponsored Coverage 
The new rules for employers do not require them to sponsor health coverage for employees but are designed to give them incentives to do so. We will not provide the details of these rules here, but in effect, as of 2014 employers with 50 or more employees will generally have to either sponsor coverage for their employees or pay fees to help defray the government’s cost of subsidizing coverage for them. Also, even if an employer sponsors a health plan, if an employee finds getting coverage through an exchange more advantageous than enrolling in the employer’s plan, the employer must pay a fee to help defray the government’s cost.  
Employers with fewer than 50 employees pay no fees. Employers who have no more than 25 employees and meet some other requirements are eligible for tax credits to help them sponsor coverage.  
Employer-sponsored plans will be required to provide a minimum benefit package and meet some other requirements.  
Exchanges 
To ensure that those required to have health coverage can obtain it, the government will sponsor American Health Benefit Exchanges through which individuals can buy policies from insurers and Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) exchanges for employers. These exchanges will provide information to consumers about available health plans and facilitate enrollment. They will become operational and open to individuals and small employers (100 or fewer employees) by January 1, 2014. Beginning in 2017 states can allow large employers to participate as well.  
Exchanges will be established and run by the states, but the federal government will provide assistance and funding in setting them up, and if a state does not create an exchange the federal government will establish one for it. States can join together to form regional exchanges, and more than one exchange can operate in a state, as long as the geographical areas served by different exchanges do not overlap. The exchanges will be administered by a government agency or nonprofit organization. 
There will be an essential benefits package that is the minimum a health plan offered through the exchanges or (as of 2014) in the individual and small group market can provide. Plans meeting this minimum standard are referred to as qualified plans. A qualified plan must cover a comprehensive set of healthcare services and may charge no more than a maximum annual amount in cost-sharing. A qualified plan must also have a minimum actuarial value of 60 percent—that is, it must pay at least 60 percent of the cost of the healthcare services it covers, so that the portion of costs that plan members must pay in cost-sharing payments (deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance) is limited.  
Health plans already existing as of March 23, 2010, are exempt from this requirement and are called grandfathered plans. However, if certain changes (still to be specified) are made to an existing plan, it may lose its grandfathered status. 
In addition to instituting a basic qualified plan, to facilitate the comparison of plans, ACA establishes categories of plans based on benefits and cost-sharing. All qualified plans meet the requirements outlined above, and they must match one of the following categories: bronze plan (actuarial value of 60 percent), silver plan (70 percent), gold plan (80 percent), platinum plan (90 percent), or catastrophic plan. Catastrophic coverage is available only to individuals 30 and younger and people exempt from the individual mandate to have health coverage. Subsidies for Individuals 
So that people required to have health coverage can afford it, premium subsidies in the form of income tax credits are available to those with income below 400 percent of the federal poverty level who purchase coverage through an exchange. Subsidies to help pay deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance will also be available for some of those who obtain coverage through the exchange.  Requirements for Health Plans 
As of 2014 new health plans, whether offered through an exchange or not, will have to match one of the benefit-based categories outlined above under exchanges (bronze, silver, etc.). Grandfathered plans are exempt. In addition, the following requirements apply to all health plans (including grandfathered plans): 
• Lifetime limits on benefits are prohibited (2010).  
• Annual limits on benefits are restricted as of 2010 and will be prohibited in 2014. 
• Medical loss ratio and rebates (2011). If the amount a plan spends on healthcare (its medical loss ratio) is less than 85 percent of the amount it receives in premiums, the plan must pay the difference to members in rebates. (The level for the individual and small group market is 80 percent, to reflect higher administrative costs.) 
• Guaranteed issue (2014). In the exchanges and the individual and small group market, policies must be offered on a guaranteed issue basis (without consideration of an individual’s current health, medical history, or family medical history). 
• Preexisting conditions. Benefits may not be excluded or limited for preexisting conditions (for children in 2010, for adults in 2014). 
• Premium rating (2014). Different premium rates can be based only on age, geographical area, family size, and tobacco use. Age-based rating is limited to a ratio of 3 to 1, and the increase for tobacco use can be no more than 50 percent. 
• Guaranteed renewable (2014). In the exchanges and the individual and small group market, policies must be guaranteed renewable. 
• Dependent coverage (2010). Plans with dependent coverage must provide it to children up to age 26. 
• Deductibles in the small group market generally cannot exceed $2,000 (individual) or $4,000 (family) (2014).  
• Rescission (2010). Insurers may not rescind coverage (annul a policy) except in cases of fraud. 
It should be clarified that these requirements apply to broad-based health coverage, not insurance products such as stand-alone vision or dental benefits, disability income insurance, or long-term care insurance. Taxation 
We have discussed the income tax penalties on individuals who do not have health coverage and the fees levied on employers. There are many other tax changes, the most important of which are these: 
• Tax on high-value (“Cadillac”) health plans (2018). If an employer-sponsored health plan has a value greater than $10,200 (individual) or $27,500 (family), an excise tax of 40 percent of the value in excess of these amounts will be levied on the insurer (or the employer or plan administrator for self-insured plans). This tax will be passed on to employers and employees in the form of higher premiums and is intended to give them an incentive not to choose such plans. 
• Medicare taxes on high-income taxpayers (2013). To strengthen Medicare finances, people with high incomes will be required to contribute more to the program. These people will pay a higher Medicare employment tax rate on their earnings above a certain level as well as a new tax on unearned (investment) income.  
• Taxes on health insurers. Substantial new taxes on health insurance companies will be phased in from 2014 to 2018. 
• Taxes on drug and medical device manufacturers. As of 2011 a fee will levied on manufacturers and importers of brand-name prescription drugs, and as of 2013 an excise tax of 2.3 percent will apply to the sale price of medical devices (but not glasses, contact lenses, hearing aids, and other items generally purchased by consumers for their own use).  
Quality and Cost 
ACA includes a wide array of regulations and programs designed to improve the quality of healthcare and contain costs. Goals include: 
• simplifying and standardizing health insurance administration, 
• supporting research in the comparative effectiveness of medical procedures and identifying and promoting best practices,  fostering preventive healthcare and wellness programs,   investing in the education and training of healthcare personnel,  promoting the use of generic drugs,  
• making it easier and less costly for insurers to sell coverage in multiple states by streamlining the regulatory process through national plans and a compact among states,  combating fraud and abuse,   encouraging the development of alternative medical malpractice laws, and 
• creating an office of consumer health insurance assistance to serve as an 
advocate for consumers. 
 

25 State Laws and Regulation 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 identify the key requirements of the NAIC HMO Model Act,  list the main state laws governing other (non-HMO) entities, and   list the main NAIC models for health plan accountability. 
In the last module we discussed various federal laws that govern health plans in their roles as business entities and as participants in the delivery and financing of healthcare. But the bulk of health plan regulation exists at the state level, and although the new federal Affordable Care Act (ACA) will have an enormous impact on health plans, the states will continue to take the leading role in regulating them. Moreover, as the provisions of ACA go into effect in the coming years, states will be taking regulatory and administrative actions to implement elements of the Act and address issues and problems that arise in relation to it. 
Because health plans evolved within the indemnity insurance environment, many of the provisions of early health plan laws mirrored traditional indemnity insurance laws. As prepaid health plans emerged, state regulatory authorities faced the task of developing new laws that more appropriately addressed health plans. Two state agencies shared much of the responsibility for this: the insurance department and the health department. The insurance department, with the support of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), handles most of the regulation related to financial issues, and the health department addresses healthcare delivery and quality assurance issues. 
Regulation of HMOs 
Before passage of the federal HMO Act of 1973, health insurance plans were subject to laws designed to regulate the operations of insurance companies or hospital and medical service corporations, and these laws often restricted the development of HMOs. The federal HMO Act encouraged states to develop statutes that would facilitate rather than hinder the establishment and operation of HMOs. One of the most important steps in this movement was the NAIC’s development of its Health Maintenance Organization Model Act (HMO Model Act). Today almost every state has laws that address HMOs, many patterned after the Model Act. 
The NAIC HMO Model Act regulates HMO operations in two critical areas: financial responsibility and healthcare delivery. The Model Act addresses financial responsibility through licensing requirements and financial standards. It addresses healthcare delivery by establishing requirements for network adequacy, quality assurance, and grievance procedures. The Act also includes filing and reporting requirements.  
Financial Responsibility Requirements 
As you recall from an earlier module, an HMO that wishes to begin operations in a state is required to obtain a certificate of authority (COA), or license, from that state. The COA provides proof that the organization has met the state’s licensing requirements and has demonstrated that it is dependable, fiscally sound, and able to meet specified quality standards.  
HMOs are also required to meet financial standards related to net worth or capital, financial reporting, liquidity, and accounting and investment practices. For example, in order to obtain a COA, an HMO must have an initial net worth of $1.5 million, and thereafter it must maintain a minimum net worth specified by the state. These financial standards are designed to protect plan members from the risk of an HMO becoming insolvent. Insolvency occurs when an organization’s assets or resources are not adequate to cover its debts and obligations. An HMO is considered to be insolvent when it does not have enough resources to pay for its members’ current and future healthcare needs.  
If the state insurance commissioner finds that an HMO is or is likely to become insolvent, the commissioner can intervene by monitoring a corrective plan developed by the HMO, reducing the volume of new business the HMO can accept, taking steps to reduce the HMO’s expenses, or prohibiting the HMO from writing new business for a specified period of time. If these interventions are inadequate, the HMO Model Act grants the state commissioner the authority to take over the management of the HMO. In some cases, HMO insolvency can be handled through administrative supervision, which involves placing HMO operations under the direction and control of the insurance commissioner or a person appointed by him or her. Such action can be ordered by the commissioner or agreed to by the commissioner and the HMO.  
If more serious action is necessary, the HMO can be placed in receivership. Receivership is a situation in which the commissioner, acting for a state court, takes control of and administers an HMO’s assets and liabilities. The primary goal of receivership is to rehabilitate the HMO—that is, return the organization to normal operation. In this case, the HMO’s business continues to exist. If rehabilitation is not possible, the commissioner can liquidate the organization by transferring all of the its business and assets to other carriers or by selling its assets to satisfy its obligations. Liquidation terminates the HMO’s business. 
Healthcare Delivery Requirements 
The HMO Model Act focuses on three key aspects of healthcare delivery:  
• Network adequacy is typically measured by the geographic distribution of providers within the HMO’s service area and by the availability of adequate numbers and types of providers based on enrollment. State regulators determine network adequacy by examining the description of the HMO’s service area and the list of network providers’ names, addresses, and license numbers included in the HMO’s COA application.  
• Quality assurance requirements focus on an HMO’s procedures for facilitating the delivery of healthcare services to plan enrollees. The Model Act requires that healthcare delivery procedures follow reasonable standards for quality of care and be consistent with prevailing professionally recognized standards of medical practice. An HMO’s quality assurance program must include a statement of the HMO’s goals and objectives for evaluating and improving enrollees’ health status; documentation of all quality assurance activities; and a system for periodically reporting program results to the HMO’s board of directors, its providers, and regulators. 
• Grievance procedures. The Model Act requires HMOs to maintain records of all complaints received by the organization and to make these records available to the appropriate regulatory authority for review. In addition, the Model Act requires HMOs to file a description of the internal procedures they follow to resolve member complaints.  
Reporting Requirements 
The NAIC HMO Model Act requires HMOs to satisfy a variety of filing and reporting requirements. For example, HMOs must submit copies of proposed provider and group contract forms, evidence of coverage forms, and premium rate methodology as part of the COA application process. Changes to any of these forms must also be filed with the appropriate state agency. In addition, HMOs must file annual reports with state regulators describing their finances and operations. Annual reports must be filed on state-approved forms and verified by at least two of the HMO’s principal officers.  
To protect the interests of HMO enrollees, the Model Act authorizes state insurance departments to conduct periodic examinations to verify an HMO’s compliance with financial, service delivery, and reporting requirements. HMO operations, quality assurance programs, and provider networks are examined at least once every three years.  
Regulation of Other Entities 
Preferred Provider Arrangements 
In addition to HMO laws, all states have laws to regulate health plans that include preferred provider arrangements. These laws define a preferred provider arrangement (PPA) as a contract between a healthcare insurer and a healthcare provider or group of providers who agree to provide services to persons covered under the contract. Preferred provider organizations (PPOs) and exclusive provider organizations (EPOs) are examples of health plans that include a preferred provider arrangement.  
Laws governing PPAs of course vary by state, and they also differ according to the structure of a health plan. For instance, an HMO offering a POS product and a PPO both provide enhanced network benefits and lesser non-network benefits, but a state may regulate the HMO under its HMO law and the PPO under state insurance laws. Likewise, a traditional HMO and an EPO may both exclude benefits for out-of-network care, but the HMO falls under the HMO law and the EPO under insurance laws. This can be important, as differences between a state’s HMO law and its insurance code can result in differences in premiums, covered services, and benefit levels, even though the product concept is the same. Finally, it should be noted that a significant number of 
PPAs are self-funded employer plans, which are not subject to state insurance laws.  
In an effort to establish minimum standards for preferred provider arrangements and the health plans that include these arrangements, the NAIC has proposed a Preferred 
Provider Arrangement Model Act (PPA Model Act). This model requires PPAs to: 
 clearly identify any differences in benefit levels for services of preferred providers and non-preferred providers,  establish the amount and manner of payment to preferred providers,   include mechanisms for minimizing the cost of the health plan, and  provide plan members with reasonable access to covered services.  
In addition, health plans under a PPA must include an adequate number of preferred providers to deliver covered services and provide benefits for emergency care by a nonpreferred provider if needed. Although only a few states have enacted laws based closely on the NAIC PPA Model Act, most states have enacted legislation to regulate PPOs.  
Point-of-Service Products 
State laws regulating other types of health plans are far less uniform than those governing HMOs and PPAs. For instance, state statutes traditionally prohibited HMOs from offering point-of-service (POS) products, but recent pressure from consumers has led to an increasing number of state mandates requiring existing HMOs to offer a POS option. In some states an HMO can offer a POS product directly, but in others it can offer it only as an indemnity wraparound policy—an out-of-plan product that a health plan offers through an agreement with an insurance company. The introduction of POS products has created a regulatory challenge for most states, because these products have features of both HMOs and indemnity insurance and as such they can be subject to either state HMO laws or state insurance laws. 
Utilization Review 
Entities that perform utilization review (UR) are called utilization review organizations (UROs). They can be in-house departments of health plans or external entities. Utilization review is generally subject to regulation if the recommendations affect a health plan’s decision to cover a specific service.  
Although UR laws vary widely, most states require UROs to be licensed and to obtain some form of certification. For a URO to be certified, its personnel must satisfy certain criteria related to education, training, and experience. UROs must also typically meet standards for accessibility and confidentiality of medical information. UROs that fail to comply with state laws are subject to fines and penalties levied.  
The NAIC has adopted a Utilization Review Model Act. Provisions of the Model Act specify that all health carriers that provide or perform utilization review must: 
• implement a written utilization review program (including data sources, review criteria, and appeals processes) and report annually on the program; 
• use and make publicly available upon request documented clinical review 
criteria; 
• use qualified health professionals, including clinical peers where appropriate, to administer the program;   establish written procedures for adverse determinations and appeals;   not tie reviewer compensation to the number of adverse determinations;  
• cover, without preauthorization, emergency services necessary to screen and stabilize a covered person, if a prudent layperson would believe an emergency exists. Health carriers are required to pay noncontracting providers for such services if a prudent layperson would believe that using a contracting provider would result in delays that would worsen the emergency or if federal, state, or local law requires the use of a specific provider. 
Third-Party Administrators1 
Third-party administrators (TPAs) are companies that provide administrative services to health plans, employers, or other plan sponsors. Some of these administrative services, such as underwriting and claims, are classified as insurance activities and as such are subject to state regulation.  
Most of the state laws regulating TPAs are modeled on the NAIC Third-Party Administrator (TPA) Model Act. These laws typically specify that to act as a TPA an organization must obtain a certificate of authority from the state insurance department designating the organization as a TPA. A TPA must also maintain, as a business record for each client organization, a written agreement describing the duties the TPA will perform, the compensation it will receive, and the standards that pertain to the business the TPA will administer.  
Regardless of the terms of any TPA agreement, the health plan remains responsible for determining all premium rates, benefits, underwriting criteria, and claim payment procedures, and for ensuring that the plan is administered properly. The TPA serves primarily as a fiduciary. As such, it must hold all funds it receives on behalf of the health plan in trust and must provide the plan with an accounting of all transactions performed on behalf of the health plan. The TPA is required to notify the state insurance department of any material changes in ownership, control, or qualification for a certificate of authority.  
The TPA Model Act specifies mandatory suspension or revocation of a TPA’s certificate of authority if the TPA is financially unsound, is using practices that are harmful to insured persons or the public, or has failed to pay any judgment rendered against it within 60 days. The state insurance department has discretionary authority to suspend or revoke a TPA’s certificate of authority if the TPA has violated the state’s insurance laws; refused to be examined or to produce its records for examination; refused, without just cause, to pay claims or perform services under its agreement; or been placed under suspension or revocation in another state. 
 
Health Plan Accountability 
The NAIC has developed several health plan accountability model acts, paving the way for the creation of state statutes. 
Credentialing 
The NAIC’s Health Care Professional Credentialing Verification Model Act specifies requirements that health plans must satisfy to ensure that network providers meet minimum standards of professional qualification. These requirements include the following: 
• verification of the credentials of all contracted healthcare professionals in accordance with written procedures that must be disclosed, on written request, to any applying healthcare professional;  
• collection of a minimum set of credentialing information by either primary or secondary verification, with recredentialing required every three years; and 
• establishment of a process by which providers can review and correct credentialing information. 
Although credentialing is required for all health plans, meeting a plan’s credentialing criteria does not ensure a provider’s selection by that plan.  
Quality Management 
Legislatures continue to express interest in creating, expanding, or rewriting quality standards for health plans, and numerous states have enacted laws, many of which are patterned after the NAIC’s Quality Assessment and Improvement Model Act. This model requires health plans to establish and report on systems for assessing the quality of care and services they provide. In particular, quality assessment laws require health plans to:  
• establish an appropriate system for assessing the quality of healthcare services provided by each type of network, 
• report to the appropriate licensing authorities any problems that would offer grounds for provider termination, 
• file a written description of quality assessment programs with the state insurance commissioner or the secretary of the state health department, 
• describe quality programs to consumers through marketing and educational materials, and  meet specified data confidentiality requirements.  
The model also requires closed plans to implement a quality improvement program to identify the best and worst outcomes and utilization patterns and the providers responsible for each. Closed plans are defined as health plans that require covered persons to use participating providers. Closed plans are required to develop treatment protocols, practice guidelines, and other quality improvement strategies and to report annually on the impact of these strategies. 
Network Adequacy 
The NAIC’s Health Plan Network Adequacy Model Act requires all health plans to:  
• meet specified adequacy and accessibility standards; 
• hold covered persons harmless against provider collections and provide continued coverage for uncompleted treatment in the event of plan insolvency;  develop standards to be used in the selection of providers; 
• adhere to specified disclosure requirements, including 60-day written notice to providers before terminating a contract without cause and 15-day notice to patients of a provider’s contract termination; and 
• file written access plans and sample contract forms with the state insurance commissioner.  
In addition, under this Model Act plans may not: 
• induce providers to deliver less than medically necessary care,   prevent providers from discussing treatment options with patients, or   penalize providers for whistleblower activities against plans. 
Grievance Procedures  
The NAIC’s Health Carrier Grievance Procedure Model Act calls for the development of written procedures for handling subscriber grievances. All health carriers are required to maintain an internal first-level grievance review and a second-level review panel and to allow covered persons to review relevant information, attend review panel meetings, and have representation.  
Privacy of Information 
As you recall from the last module, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley (GLB) Act called on the states to enact laws governing specific financial services entities, and the NAIC responded by proposing a Privacy of Consumer Financial and Health Information Model Regulation to govern the activities of healthcare organizations and insurers. Whereas the GLB Act focused on the use and disclosure of nonpublic financial information, the NAIC’s Model Act covers personally identifiable health information as well. Rules governing the use and disclosure of health information are included under Article V of the Model Regulation and describe:  
• when authorization is required for disclosure of nonpublic personal health information, 
• the procedures a consumer may use to opt out of otherwise permissible information-sharing between health plans and other related business entities,  requirements for a valid authorization, and  
• conditions under which authorization requests and authorization forms must be delivered to customers. 
This model applies to all licensees of the state insurance department, including health plans. The model does not preempt or supersede any existing state laws related to medical records or the privacy of health or insurance information. 
Note 
                                                 
1  Adapted from Harriett E. Jones, Regulatory Compliance: Companies, Producers, and Operations (LOMA, © 1998), p. 63. Used with permission; all rights reserved. 

26 Government Programs: Medicare 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
 describe the Medicare program, including its component parts and the options available to beneficiaries;   tell how the Medicare Advantage program has developed;   identify the different types of Medicare Advantage plans; and  describe Medigap policies. 
The federal government is a payor and purchaser of healthcare benefits. It provides health benefits directly or through grants, and it operates programs that serve populations such as the elderly and disabled (Medicare), low-income people (Medicaid), federal employees (FEHB), and active and retired members of the uniformed services and their dependents (TRICARE). The federal government also plays an important role in healthcare by maintaining standards for Medicare healthcare providers, federally qualified HMOs, and health plans for federal employees, as well as quality standards for hospitals, clinical laboratories, and many other healthcare entities. Most federal healthcare functions are under the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), which includes the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).  
This module examines the Medicare program, with special attention to the Medicare Advantage program, through which individuals can opt to receive Medicare coverage from a private-sector health plan. It also takes a look at Medicare supplement insurance. For all topics we note changes made by recent healthcare reform legislation. 
In this module Medicare dollar amounts for 2010 are used. (They are adjusted annually for inflation.) 
Medicare 
Medicare is a federal program that was established under Title XVIII of the Social Security Act of 1965. It is social insurance that provides benefits for hospital care, medical services, and other healthcare expenses. It is available to persons 65 or older; people under 65 with severe, long-term disabilities; and persons with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) or ALS: 
Medicare is an entitlement program—for individuals who meet the qualifications, benefits are a right. Medicare provides extensive coverage, but it does not cover all healthrelated expenses, and beneficiaries must pay significant deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance. Therefore individuals may want to supplement Medicare with private-sector insurance (discussed below). 
Medicare consists of Parts A, B, C, and D: 
• Medicare originally had two components: Part A (hospital coverage) and Part B 
(medical coverage). Parts A and B together are referred to as “original Medicare” or “traditional Medicare.” Original Medicare is traditional fee-forservice coverage. 
• IN 1997 Part C was added. This is the Medicare Advantage (MA) program, which gives beneficiaries the option of obtaining Part A and Part B coverage (and some other benefits) through a Medicare-approved private-sector health plan. Most MA plans are managed care plans. 
• In 2006 Part D (prescription drug coverage) was added. Medicare beneficiaries choose whether to participate in Part D, and those who do pay an additional monthly premium. Part D benefits are provided by Medicare-approved privatesector prescription drug plans (PDPs) and by most Medicare Advantage plans. 
A majority of Medicare beneficiaries receive coverage though original Medicare, but over 11 million (about 24 percent) choose Medicare Advantage (2010).1 A majority of beneficiaries are also enrolled in Part D, either through a PDP or an MA plan. 
Medicare Part A 
Coverage 
Medicare Part A includes benefits for the following:  
• Inpatient hospital care. There is a large deductible ($1,100) per benefit period (usually a hospital stay), large daily copayments ($275) after 60 days, and a limit of 90 days per benefit period (except for 60 lifetime reserve days, for which there is a daily copayment of $550). 
• Skilled nursing facility care following hospitalization. Skilled care must be medically necessary for recovery from an acute illness or injury, and other conditions must be met. There are a limit of 100 days per benefit period and large daily copayments ($137.50) after day 20. 
• Home healthcare following hospitalization or nursing facility care. Intermittent skilled care must be medically necessary for recovery from an acute illness or injury, and other conditions must be met. There is no cost-sharing, but there is a limit of 100 home visits. 
• Hospice care, provided to terminally ill persons. Only small copayment and coinsurance amounts for a few items are charged. 
Eligibility and Premiums 
Part A is provided without charge to U.S. citizens and certain resident aliens who are 65 or older and receiving or eligible for Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board (RRB) retirement benefits, as well as most persons participating in retirement programs for federal, state, or local government employees instead of Social Security. Other people 65 or older may enroll in Part A, but they must pay a premium (up to $461 a month). As a general rule, those who paid into the Medicare system while they were working by means of FICA payroll deductions for at least a minimal amount of time (or whose spouses did so) do not pay a premium, while those who did not must pay. 
Medicare Part A is also available to disabled persons under 65 who meet certain criteria. They must qualify for Social Security or RRB disability benefits, which means that their disability must be total—that is, so severe that they are unable to engage in any substantially gainful work. And the disability must be long-term—they must have received SS or RRB disability benefits for at least 24 months. Because of these restrictive conditions, many disabled persons do not qualify. 
Individuals of any age who suffer permanent kidney failure (end-stage renal disease, or 
ESRD) or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease) are also eligible. To qualify on the basis of a disability, ESRD, or ALS, a person (or his or her spouse) must have paid into the Medicare system for at least minimal amount of time while working. Those who have not done so may not enroll by paying a premium, as can those 65 or older. Finally, healthcare reform extends Medicare eligibility to people who have developed certain health conditions as a result of living in an area where they were exposed to environmental health hazards. 
Funding 
Medicare Part A is funded primarily by payroll taxes on working people and their employers. Currently, employees and employers each pay 7.65 percent of wages in FICA taxes, of which 6.2 percent is for Social Security and 1.45 percent is for Medicare. While Social Security taxes are levied only on wages up to $106,800 per year, Medicare taxes apply to all wages, even those above this level. A self-employed person pays both the employer and the employee portion, for a total of 15.3 percent. 
Healthcare reform makes two important changes to this system beginning in tax year 2013: 
• Tax increase on earned income. Those with annual employment earnings above $200,000 (individual) or $250,000 (couple) will pay a higher Medicare employment tax rate on their earnings above that level (2.35 percent instead of the usual 1.45 percent). The employer contribution (1.45 percent) will not be increased. These thresholds will not be adjusted for inflation, so over time more people will be liable for this increased rate. 
• Tax on unearned income. There will be a 3.8 percent Medicare tax on unearned income (investment income such as interest, dividends, and capital gains) of high-worth individuals, estates, and trusts. For individuals this tax will apply to net investment income or to modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) in excess of $200,000 (individual) or $250,000 (couples), whichever is less. 
Medicare Part B 
Coverage 
Medicare Part B covers a wide array of services and supplies, including physician and surgeon services, services provided by some other healthcare practitioners, outpatient medical and surgical services, emergency room and ambulance services, laboratory services, therapy, mental healthcare, durable medical equipment, and others. Healthcare reform adds several preventive care services to Part B coverage, including annual wellness visits, various disease screenings, personalized disease prevention plans, cardiac rehabilitation programs (including exercise, education, and counseling), an EKG, and others. 
With a few limited exceptions, original Medicare does not pay benefits for dental care and dentures, vision care and eyeglasses, hearing exams and hearing aids, foot care and orthopedic shoes, chiropractic services, healthcare delivered outside the United States, and some other health-related services and products. In the past Medicare coverage of preventive care was fairly limited, but it has been expanded in recent years, and as noted above, healthcare reform continues this trend. As a result, although there are still a few screenings and diagnostic tests that are not covered, this is no longer a major coverage gap. 
For most Part B services and products beneficiaries must pay an annual deductible ($155) and 20 percent coinsurance. Healthcare reform eliminates this cost-sharing for most (but not all) preventive care. There is currently 45 percent coinsurance for outpatient mental healthcare, but from 2011 through 2014 this will be gradually lowered to 20 percent. Under both Part A and Part B, beneficiaries must pay for the first three pints of blood (if it is not donated by a blood bank, as is usually the case).  
Eligibility and Premiums 
All U.S. citizens (and certain resident aliens) 65 or older have the option of receiving 
Medicare Part B. Persons with disabilities, ESRD, or ALS who are eligible for Medicare Part A are also eligible for Part B. Because Part B covers important healthcare services not covered by Part A, almost all those enrolled in Part A choose Part B as well. 
All Part B enrollees pay a monthly premium. Most people—those with annual income at or below $85,000 (individual) or $170,000 (couple)—pay the standard premium, while those with greater income pay higher amounts based on their income. In 2010 the standard premium is $110.30, but only new enrollees and those not receiving Social Security pay this amount; most people continue to pay the 2009 amount of $96.40.2 Under healthcare reform, the income level above which beneficiaries must pay a higherthan-standard Part B premium will be frozen from 2011 through 2019, so that as incomes rise more beneficiaries will pay the higher premium. 
Part A and Part B Enrollment 
People who receive Social Security or RRB retirement benefits are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A when they turn 65. Disabled persons are automatically enrolled after they have received SS or RRB disability benefits for 24 months. Both of these groups are also enrolled in Part B unless they indicate that they want to opt out. Others eligible for Medicare (such as those who are 65 or older but still working and not receiving Social Security) must sign up for Part A and Part B if they want it. 
Those who must pay for Medicare Part A can enroll during an initial enrollment period 
(three months before and after they turn 65) or later during a general enrollment period (every year from January 1 through March 31). Persons who have employer-sponsored health insurance can enroll at any time while they are still covered by the employer plan and up to eight months after this coverage ends. People who opt out of Medicare Part B when they first become eligible may enroll later during a general enrollment period, and those with employer-sponsored coverage have until eight months after that coverage ends.  
Individuals who do not enroll in Part A or Part B when they first become eligible and are not covered by employer-sponsored insurance may have to pay a late enrollment penalty, in the form of a higher premium, if they enroll later. The Part A premium is increased by 10 percent and the Part B premium by 10 percent for every 12-month period the person waits to enroll.  
Medicare Part C (Medicare Advantage) 
Medicare Advantage (Medicare Part C) is an alternative to original Medicare. Those entitled to Medicare can choose to receive coverage through original Medicare, or (in most areas of the country) they have the option of instead participating in a Medicare Advantage (MA) plan. MA plans include health maintenance organizations (HMOs), preferred provider organizations (PPOs), private fee-for-service (PFFS) plans, and others (described below). 
Medicare Advantage plans are Medicare-approved private-sector health insurance plans. The Medicare program pays an MA plan a fixed amount each month for each person it serves, and the plan provides Medicare coverage. An MA plan must provide all Part A and Part B coverage. Most MA plans provide additional benefits, such as coverage of Medicare cost-sharing payments, and some provide coverage that goes beyond original Medicare such as dental care, hearing aids, and eyeglasses. Finally, most Medicare Advantage plans offer Medicare Part D prescription drug benefits (usually at an additional cost). 
Premiums and Enrollment 
Enrollees pay their MA plan a monthly premium that covers the Medicare Part B premium and pays for any benefits in addition to Medicare Part A and B that the plan provides. MA participants also pay copayments and sometimes deductibles and coinsurance for some services. The extent of coverage beyond original Medicare, premium rates, and cost-sharing payments vary from plan to plan.  
To enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan, a person must be enrolled in or eligible for Medicare Part A and Part B and live in the area covered by the MA plan. A person can enroll in an MA plan when she first becomes eligible for Medicare (three months before and after she turns 65 or three months before and after her 24th month of disability). There are also enrollment periods each year during which a person can switch from original Medicare to an MA plan, or from an MA plan to original Medicare, or from one MA plan to another. 
Medicare Part D 
Medicare Part D provides outpatient prescription drug coverage. Persons eligible for Medicare choose whether to participate in Part D, and those who do pay an additional monthly premium. Part D benefits are provided by Medicare-approved private-sector prescription drug plans (PDPs). A Medicare beneficiary enrolls in the PDP of her choice, receives benefits from that PDP, and pays her Part D premium directly to the PDP. Most Medicare Advantage plans also offer Part D benefits (usually at an additional cost). A majority of Medicare beneficiaries have Part D coverage, 38 percent from a PDP, 19 percent from an MA plan.3 
Medicare beneficiaries usually have many PDPs to choose from, and PDPs vary in the benefit packages they offer. But all plans must provide a minimal level of benefits, and Medicare also specifies certain drugs that all PDPs must cover. The benefits and costsharing of a PDP are typically structured as follows: 
• Annual deductible. The standard amount in 2010 is $310, but this may vary, and not all PDPs have a deductible. 
• Copayments and/or coinsurance. Coinsurance percentages are often 25 or 33 percent. Copayment amounts vary widely from plan to plan. 
• Coverage gap. Once the total amount both the beneficiary and the PDP have paid for drugs reaches a certain level (the initial coverage limit), there is a coverage gap, during which the beneficiary pays all costs and the PDP pays nothing. Some PDPs cover some drugs during the coverage gap, but they charge a higher premium. 
• Catastrophic coverage. If the amount the beneficiary has paid for drugs reaches a certain level (the out-of-pocket limit), catastrophic coverage is triggered, and the coverage gap ends. From this point until the end of the year, the beneficiary pays only small copayment or coinsurance amounts.  
Let’s look at an example of how Part D works: Kate is a Medicare beneficiary enrolled in a PDP. She takes several prescription drugs. How much of her costs does the PDP pay, and how much does Kate have to pay herself? 
• Each year, Kate must pay the first $310 of costs to satisfy her plan’s deductible. Then, under the rules of her plan, she pays 25 percent coinsurance—that is, she pays 25 percent of costs and the PDP pays the rest. (Other plans charge a different percentage or flat-dollar copayment amounts.)  
• After several months, the amount Kate has paid (for the deductible and coinsurance) plus the amount the PDP has paid together total $2,830, the initial coverage limit (2010). The coverage gap begins, and Kate must pay the full cost of her prescriptions for the remainder of the year (although she benefits from discounts negotiated by her PDP). 
• Now suppose Kate’s costs (deductible, coinsurance, and costs she pays herself after the initial coverage limit) reach $4,550, the out-of-pocket limit (2010). Catastrophic coverage is triggered, and from then until the end of the year, Kate pays only small coinsurance or copayment amounts.  
Healthcare reform makes substantial changes to this system. In 2010 beneficiaries who have to pay their own costs during the coverage gap will receive a $250 rebate. From 2011 through 2020, the portion of costs beneficiaries pay during the coverage gap will be gradually reduced to 25 percent, effectively eliminating the gap. Also during those years the level at which catastrophic coverage is triggered will be lowered. And starting in 2011 drug manufacturers will be required to give those in the coverage gap a 50 percent discount on brand-name drugs, and additional federal subsidies for generic drugs will be phased in. 
People with low income and limited assets may qualify for “extra help”—Medicare may help pay their premiums, deductibles, and copayments and coinsurance, and there is no coverage gap. 
A person can enroll in Part D when he first becomes eligible for Medicare or later, during an annual enrollment period (November 15 through December 31 of each year, with coverage beginning January 1). However, for those who enroll after they first become eligible there is generally a late enrollment penalty—they pay a higher premium for as long as they are enrolled in Medicare Part D. There is an exception for those who have employer-sponsored drug coverage—they may wait to enroll, and there is no penalty as long as they enroll no later than 63 days after losing their employer coverage.  
The History of Medicare Managed Care  
Medicare beneficiaries pose unique challenges for Medicare health plans, which take on the financial risk for the provision of services under fixed payments received from the federal government. Medicare beneficiaries have a higher incidence of both acute illness and chronic illness than does the general population, and they are more likely to become disabled and require long periods of rehabilitation. At the same time, health plans have a much greater ability than fee-for-service insurance to effectively manage the delivery of multiple or complex medical services and contain costs through emphasis on preventive care services, utilization management, and coordinated care through network providers. The federal government seeks to bring these attributes to Medicare by encouraging private-sector options. Figure 25.1 demonstrates the growth in enrollment in Medicare Advantage plans over time. 
Figure 25.1 
 
The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) of 1982  
The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) of 1982 introduced managed care into Medicare. Under TEFRA, health plans entered into contracts with Medicare to provide Part A and/or Part B benefits on either a cost basis or a risk basis. Organizations with cost contracts received monthly payments from the federal government based on estimates of the reasonable cost of delivering covered services, which could be adjusted to reflect actual costs. Cost plans accepted no risk and allowed beneficiaries to use doctors and hospitals outside the plan networks. Enrollees were required to pay a large portion of their healthcare expenses through premiums and deductibles. Health plans could contract on a cost basis for both Medicare Part A and Part B coverage or for Part B services only. Health plans that offered Part A and B were referred to as reasonable cost contracts or cost contracts. Health plans that offered only Part B coverage were classified as healthcare prepayment plans (HCPPs). 
Health plans that participated in Medicare risk contracts received a specified geographically based capitation payment from CMS each month for each plan member, regardless of the amount or cost of services the member actually received. The health plans were at risk for delivering the contracted-for level of services at these fixed rates. Medicare risk contracts were attractive to beneficiaries because they typically offered preventive care and other benefits beyond the traditional Medicare Part A and Part B services for the same or only slightly higher premiums. For services to be covered, however, they needed to be obtained from the Medicare risk plan's network of providers and were subject to other utilization controls. 
The Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997  
The Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997 again restructured the Medicare program, absorbing the TEFRA Medicare risk contracts into the new Medicare+Choice program. Medicare plans that complied with CMS requirements were automatically transitioned into Medicare+Choice. Cost contracts were initially to be phased out by December 31, 2002, but subsequent legislation extended their operation first by two more years and then indefinitely under certain conditions set out by the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003. 
The BBA expanded the number of delivery options for Medicare services and also established operational requirements for plans participating in Medicare+Choice. These requirements have a direct impact on the types of administrative and healthcare services that Medicare health plans offer and the steps that health plans must take to maintain the quality of those services, and they were carried over to the next Medicare program restructuring. 
The Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003  
The Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 
(commonly called the Medicare Modernization Act, or MMA) renamed the Medicare+Choice program Medicare Advantage. The Medicare Advantage (MA) program was largely based on the Medicare+Choice program in terms of program operations, benefits, and quality of care initiatives, but it expanded the existing private health plan product options available to Medicare beneficiaries. Coordinated care plans, such as health maintenance organizations (HMOs), preferred provider organizations (PPOs), and provider-sponsored organizations (PSOs), as well as private fee-for-service plans, are the available options under Medicare Advantage. The MMA expanded the types of options to include new regional PPOs in 2005. 
Regional MA-PPOs 
Beginning in 2006, beneficiaries had the option of enrolling in Medicare Advantage regional PPOs (regional MA-PPOs) that offer network and out-of-network benefits as well as caps on beneficiary out-of-pocket costs. Unlike local MA plans, which serve individual counties and/or groups of counties, the new regional MA-PPOs bid to serve an entire region, which may be a state or multi-state area.  
Unlike original Medicare, with its separate deductibles for Parts A and B, regional MAPPOs are required to have a single, unified deductible (if they have one at all). They may waive this deductible for preventive care and other services. Regional PPOs must also have catastrophic limits on out-of-pocket expenditures for in-network services and for all covered services. Benefit packages and premiums must be uniform across the entire region.  

Local MA Plans 
In addition to regional MA-PPOs, there are the following categories of local MA plans: 
• Coordinated care plans (CCPs) include health maintenance organizations (HMOs), point-of-service (POS) plans, preferred provider organizations (PPOs), and provider-sponsored organizations (PSOs).  
• Private fee-for-service (PFFS) plans. PFFS plans do not have a network. Members can go to any Medicare-approved provider that accepts payment from the PFFS plan. However, not all providers accept such payment, so plan members may have limited choices. Some PFFS plans offer prescription drug coverage, but some do not. (If not, members can enroll in a Medicare Part D PDP if they wish.) The requirements for PFFS plans are changing effective 2011, causing them to shift to a provider network or cease operation. 
• Medicare medical savings account (MMSA) plans. MMSA plans work like health savings accounts (HSAs), discussed in an earlier module. Participants are covered by a qualified high-deductible health plan (HDHP) and can withdraw money from a tax-advantaged account into which the plan makes an annual deposit. Participants must pay for their care out of their own pockets until they have satisfied the deductible, after which the plan pays. They can use money from their account to pay out-of-pocket costs, but the amount deposited each year is usually less than the deductible, so they generally have to pay at least some costs out of their own funds. MMSA plans do not include drug coverage, but participants can enroll in a PDP.  
• Special needs plans (SNPs). SNPs serve special populations, such as Medicare/Medicaid dual eligibles, those with certain chronic and debilitating diseases (such as diabetes or HIV/AIDS), or nursing home residents. They operate like an HMO—they have a network, and care must normally be obtained from network providers. Members must have a primary care physician or a care coordinator and must have a referral to see a specialist. All SNPs provide drug coverage. 
Healthcare Reform 
Healthcare reform includes provisions designed to reduce government expenditures on Medicare Advantage and make MA plans operate more efficiently.  
• Government payments to MA plans will be reduced beginning in 2012. This could result in higher premiums or reduced benefits for plan members. MA plans will not be allowed to compensate for this reduction by charging higher cost-sharing than original Medicare.  
• On the other hand, MA plans that meet certain quality standards will receive bonuses (to be phased in from 2011 through 2013). A plan must use this money first to reduce costs, then to add prevention and wellness coverage, and if any money remains, to add coverage of such items as vision and dental care. 
• Beginning in 2014 MA plans will be required to maintain a medical loss ratio of at least 85 percent.  
Medicare Supplement Insurance  
As we have seen, although original Medicare provides extensive coverage, it does not pay all healthcare expenses. It has substantial deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance, and it does not cover dental care and dentures, vision care and eyeglasses, hearing aids, and a number of other health-related services and products.  
To fill some of these gaps, those enrolled in original Medicare may purchase Medicare supplement insurance (commonly called Medigap policies). Because Medicare Advantage plans offer more comprehensive coverage, MA enrollees do not need (and are not permitted to purchase) Medigap policies. 
A Medigap policy is a state-approved, private-sector individual insurance policy that provides reimbursement for expenses not covered by original Medicare. Medigap policies primarily cover cost-sharing payments Medicare beneficiaries must make. Some policies also provide benefits for a few healthcare expenses not covered by Medicare, such as emergency care received outside the U.S. Medigap policies do not cover dental, vision, or hearing care. 
Standard Medigap Plans 
Medigap policies are subject to extensive government regulation. A limited number of standard Medigap plans, each with a certain combination of benefits, have been established, and insurers are required to offer only these plans. In addition, all insurers must use the same standardized format, language, and definitions in describing the benefits of the plans. This standardization is intended to make it easier for consumers to compare plans and premiums. Since insurers offer the same standard plans, they compete on the basis of price and customer service. (This system applies in all states except Massachusetts, Minnesota, and Wisconsin, which have their own regulations.) Changes have been made to this system over the years, and new rules went into effect June 1, 2010.  
Figure 25.2 shows the standard Medigap plans as of June 1, 2010, and Figure 25.3 shows the earlier system. Only plans in Figure 25.2 can be sold now, but plans sold earlier may continue in force.4 
All Medigap plans must provide at least a basic benefit package. This includes Part A daily hospital copayments, up to 365 days of hospital coverage per lifetime after Medicare hospital benefits are exhausted, hospice copayments and coinsurance, Part B coinsurance, and the first three pints of blood each year. Since the establishment of Medicare Part D in 2006, new Medigap policies may not include prescription drug benefits, but some policies sold before then do.  
Healthcare reform will make further changes to the standardized Medigap plans. It mandates the creation of new plans C and F, with nominal cost-sharing designed to encourage the use of appropriate physician services under Medicare Part B. These new plans C and F will become available in 2015. 
 
 
 
Medicare SELECT 
A Medicare SELECT policy is a type of Medigap policy. Like other Medigap policies, a SELECT policy must provide the benefit package of one of the standard Medigap plans. The difference is that it operates like a preferred provider organization (PPO)—it has a network of healthcare providers, and beneficiaries are given financial incentives to use hospitals and in some cases physicians affiliated with the network. If they use nonnetwork providers, they may incur cost-sharing payments. On the other hand, because the use of a provider network tends to hold down costs, a SELECT plan can usually charge a lower premium.  
Eligibility and Enrollment 
To be eligible for Medigap insurance, an individual must be enrolled in original Medicare, both Part A and Part B. As noted, those participating in a Medicare Advantage plan do not need and may not buy a Medigap policy.  
If a person applies for a Medigap policy during her Medigap open enrollment period, guaranteed issue applies—that is, the insurer cannot subject her to medical underwriting, deny her coverage, make her wait for coverage, or charge her more than the standard premium. A person’s open enrollment period begins the first day of the first month in which she is both 65 or older and enrolled in Medicare Part B, and it lasts for six months. In addition, in certain circumstances an individual is entitled to guaranteed issue after her open enrollment period, such as when a person does not enroll in Medigap coverage because she has an employer-sponsored health plan but applies later when that coverage terminates, or when a person’s Medigap coverage ends through no fault of her own and she wants to buy a new policy. If a person is not entitled to guaranteed issue, the insurer has the right to conduct underwriting, decline to offer her coverage, or charge her a higher-than-standard premium. 
Conclusion 
The federal Medicare program provides healthcare coverage to the elderly, some disabled persons, and a few others. But Medicare does not pay all health-related expenses, and many beneficiaries buy an individual Medicare supplement (Medigap) insurance policy to fill some of the gaps (mostly Medicare deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance). The Medicare Advantage (MA) program offers an alternative—individuals eligible for Medicare can enroll in a private-sector MA plan and receive Medicare coverage; benefits comparable to Medigap; usually additional coverage (such as dental care, hearing aids, and eyeglasses); and in most cases Medicare Part D prescription drug benefits. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, “Medicare Advantage 2010 Data Spotlight, Plan Enrollment Patterns and Trends,” June 2010. 2  Most people have their Part B premium deducted from their Social Security check. In 2010 Social Security benefits were not increased since the cost of living did not rise. This means that if a higher Part B premium were deducted from a person’s Social Security check, she would receive less than the previous year, and this is not allowed under Social Security rules. Therefore, anyone who has been having the standard Part B premium deducted from her Social Security continues to pay the 2009 amount ($96.40). Only people who begin Medicare in 2010 or who do not have their premium deducted from Social Security pay the official 2010 amount ($110.30).  
3 The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, “Analysis of the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, Access to Care File, 2007.” 
4
  Both tables are from “Choosing a Medigap Policy 2010,” published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and available at www.Medicare.gov.  

27 Government Programs: Medicaid, CHIP, FEHB, TRICARE, and Workers’ Compensation 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to:  
• describe the main federal health coverage programs for low-income people 
   (Medicaid and CHIP),  explain the role of health plans in Medicaid and CHIP, 
• describe the Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program and the TRICARE program for the uniformed services and explain the role of health plans in them, and 
• describe state-mandated workers’ compensation coverage and the role of health plans in it.  
In the preceding module we discussed a federal program, Medicare, that provides health benefits to the elderly and some disabled persons. In this module we will look at the other major government health benefit programs.  
• Medicaid is a federal-state program that pays for healthcare for low-income people who meet certain criteria. Currently most recipients are children, pregnant women, and elderly and disabled persons, but under healthcare reform all people with income below a certain level will qualify. 
• The Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) is also a federal-state program. It provides health coverage for children whose families are not poor enough to qualify for Medicaid but too poor to buy private-sector health insurance. 
• Under the Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program, the federal government, as an employer, sponsors health coverage for its employees and their dependents. 
• TRICARE is the health plan of the Department of Defense for members of the uniformed services, retirees, and their dependents. 
• Under workers’ compensation laws, states require employers to purchase or provide coverage that pays employees benefits for healthcare costs and lost earnings if they suffer a work-related injury or illness. 
Medicaid 
Medicaid is a government program that pays for healthcare received by some poor people. Medicaid is a major component of the nation’s healthcare financing system—in 
2008 it served more than 58 million people and spent almost $320 billion.1 And healthcare reform will substantially increase these numbers, adding an expected 16 million new recipients.  
Medicaid is a federal-state program. The federal government establishes broad guidelines for its operation, but each state administers its own program and determines, within these guidelines, eligibility criteria; the type, amount, and duration of services its program pays for; and rates of payment for services. Thus, a person who is eligible for Medicaid in one state may not be eligible in another state, and the benefits provided in one state may not be provided in another. Also, state Medicaid programs may change from year to year in response to changing needs or emerging problems. 
The federal government pays a percentage of each state’s Medicaid expenditures, and the state covers the rest. The federal percentage is higher for poor states and lower for rich states, but it is at least 50 percent. 
Eligibility 
Medicaid is for the poor, but not all poor people are eligible. Some people are considered categorically needy, that is, they qualify for Medicaid because they fall into certain categories. The federal government has established a number of mandatory categories—all state Medicaid programs must provide benefits to people in these categories in order to receive federal funding. The most important mandatory categories include: 
 children ages six through 18 whose family’s income is at or below the federal poverty level (FPL) and children under six whose family’s income is at or below 133 percent of the FPL;  	pregnant women with family income at or below 133 percent of the FPL;   	elderly and disabled persons with very little or no income who qualify for Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payments; and   a few parents and other family members (such as grandparents) who take care of children younger than 18, have extremely low income, and meet certain restrictive conditions. 
There are also optional categories—states may provide Medicaid coverage to members of these categories but are not required to do so. The optional categories generally cover the same populations (children, pregnant women, the elderly, and the disabled) as the mandatory categories, but income standards and other criteria are slightly less restrictive. For example, a state may cover children six through 18 with family income up to 133 of the FPL or elderly and disabled persons who do not qualify for SSI but have incomes below the FPL.  
Some states also extend Medicaid eligibility to the medically needy—those who do not qualify as members of one of the above categories but who have depleted their income and assets to pay for healthcare or long-term care. These states allow non-poor individuals to spend down—that is, they can qualify for Medicaid benefits by spending their money on care until their income and assets are reduced to very low levels established by the state. Many middle-income people faced with the enormous costs of an indefinite period of nursing home care or home healthcare spend down until they have almost nothing left, at which point Medicaid begins covering costs. 
As mentioned, under PPACA eligibility for Medicaid will be substantially expanded. As of January 2014, states will be required to cover all persons with income at or below 133 percent of the FPL. The greatest change: Low-income adults, who currently qualify only if they fall into a certain category (pregnant, elderly, or disabled persons and a few parents), will be eligible. This means that millions of non-disabled adults under age 65, who have not been eligible in the past even though they have very low incomes, will be enrolled in Medicaid. Also, children six and older, who currently must have income at or below the FPL (although some states have somewhat higher limits), will qualify with income up to 133 percent of the FPL. The federal government will pay nearly all of the cost of providing Medicaid to these additional people: 100 percent until 2016, decreasing gradually to 90 percent in 2020. 
Coverage 
The healthcare and long-term care services covered by Medicaid vary somewhat from state to state, but in all states they are extensive. The federal government requires all state programs to provide benefits for these services: 
 	inpatient and outpatient hospital services,  	physician services,  	laboratory and X-ray services,  	medical and surgical dental services,  	nursing facility services for individuals age 21 or older,  	home healthcare for persons who are nursing home eligible (those who, according to criteria established by Medicaid, would need nursing home care if they did not receive home care), and  various other services. 
Many states also provide benefits for dental services, optometrist services and eyeglasses, prosthetic devices, and prescription drugs. Medicaid recipients may be charged small deductibles and copayments for some services. Only a few states charge premiums, and the amounts are very small. 
In the area of long-term care, as noted above, all states are required to pay for nursing home care and home healthcare for the nursing home eligible. And although federal guidelines do not require it, some states also pay benefits for home and communitybased long-term care services for certain other Medicaid recipients. Finally, some states pay for long-term care services received in an assisted living residence.  
Medicare and Medicaid Overlap 
Some elderly people with very limited assets and incomes are dual eligibles—they receive benefits from both Medicare and Medicaid. If a service is covered by both programs, Medicare pays. Medicaid pays for services not covered by Medicare but covered by Medicaid (such as nursing facility care beyond Medicare’s 100-day limit, eyeglasses, and hearing aids). Medicaid also pays for Medicare premiums and deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments for certain very poor Medicare beneficiaries.  
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) 
The Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) is a federal-state program that pays for healthcare for children from families not poor enough to qualify for Medicaid but too poor to afford private-sector health coverage. As with Medicaid, the federal government sets broad guidelines, and within those guidelines each state administers its own program, establishes eligibility rules, and provides coverage. Also like Medicaid, CHIP is jointly funded by the federal government and the states, but the federal government pays a higher percentage of costs than for Medicaid. 
While nowhere near as large as Medicare or Medicaid, CHIP provides coverage to large numbers of children who otherwise would have been uninsured. In 2008 CHIP covered 7.4 million people.2 Under PPACA, CHIP will not be substantially changed, but some CHIP children will be shifted to Medicaid, and federal funding for CHIP will increase. 
Eligibility 
Eligible for CHIP are children who: 
 are 18 or younger,   are not covered by health insurance,   are ineligible for Medicaid, and   have family income below a certain level. 
States set their own income eligibility limits for CHIP. However, full federal funding is provided only for children with family income at or below 300 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). A state may provide coverage to children with higher family income, but federal funding is lower. Most states have income limits from 200 to 300 percent of the FPL, but a few have limits above or below this range. 
States have the option of offering CHIP coverage to pregnant women without health insurance, and about a quarter of the states do. A few states also cover parents of lowincome children, but this is being phased out. Some states offer families eligible for CHIP the alternative of financial assistance to pay for private health insurance.  
Coverage 
A state’s CHIP can be part of its Medicaid program, a separate program, or both. Under a Medicaid expansion, a state must provide CHIP eligibles the same coverage it provides other Medicaid recipients. In creating a coverage package under a separate CHIP, a state may choose from these three options: 
• Benchmark coverage. The state provides the same coverage as the standard Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offered to federal employees, the health plan offered to state employees, or the health maintenance organization (HMO) with the largest number of non-Medicaid enrollees in the state. 
• Benchmark-equivalent coverage. The state provides basic coverage (physician and surgical services, inpatient and outpatient hospital care, well baby/well child care including immunizations, and laboratory and x-ray services). The state also provides coverage for additional services (prescription drugs, vision and hearing care) that is at least 75 percent of the actuarial equivalent of the benchmark plan.  
• Secretary-approved coverage. The state proposes an alternative plan and receives approval from the Secretary of HHS.  
Under both Medicaid expansions and separate CHIPs, premiums and copayments may be charged. But there are limits for families with incomes at or below 150 percent of the FPL, and for all families the total amount of premiums and cost-sharing cannot exceed 5 percent of family income. 
Medicaid, CHIP, and Health Plans 
The Growth of Medicaid Managed Care 
In the early years of Medicaid, most states made healthcare available to recipients exclusively through fee-for-service arrangements with participating medical providers. But as the program and the number of recipients grew, states began using managed care to control and predict costs and provide access to healthcare in areas where Medicaid providers were limited. States also hoped to reduce reliance on emergency rooms as a source of primary care. 
However, the shift to managed care was initially slowed by federal rules that allowed enrollment in health plans only on a voluntary basis (with the agreement of the recipient). A state could require individuals to participate in managed care, but only by obtaining a waiver (an exemption from federal guidelines) from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Two waivers were used for this purpose: The 1915(b) waiver allowed states to require enrollment in managed care and to mandate managed care in only parts of the state (waiving the rule that the same coverage must be provided statewide). The 1115 waiver provided for even more flexibility in state Medicaid programs’ benefit packages and service delivery models and allowed states to require managed care statewide. 
These waivers enabled states to increase the use of managed care, and large numbers of Medicaid recipients were enrolled in health plans. But the process of obtaining a waiver is burdensome and lengthy, often taking a year or more, and renewal is required every five years. The Balanced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997 addressed this problem by allowing states, without a waiver, to mandate managed care for all Medicaid enrollees except Medicare-Medicaid dual eligibles (elderly and disabled persons), American Indians, and certain children with special needs. Under the BBA, a state need only obtain approval of a state plan amendment (SPA), which can take as little as 30 days.  
The BBA resulted in substantial growth in Medicaid managed care. When the Act was passed in 1997, slightly less than half of Medicaid enrollees were in managed care, but by 2009 over 70 percent were. By that year, in nearly all states a majority of the Medicaid population was in managed care, and in 21 states more than 80 percent was. 
Only two states (Alaska and Wyoming) had no Medicaid managed care.3 
Medicaid Health Plans 
Under Medicaid managed care, recipients choose or are assigned to a “medical home” (a health plan) and a primary care provider (PCP). State Medicaid programs must contract with at least two managed care entities or with a single entity that offers at least two health plans, so that recipients have at least two options to choose from. There are two broad categories of service delivery: primary care case management (PCCM) and risk-based care. 
• Primary care case management (PCCM). In this approach, PCPs provide basic healthcare and serve as case managers in making referrals for specialty care. PCPs are compensated for primary care on a fee-for-service basis and for case management by means of a small monthly capitation payment. Specialty care may be delivered by a fee-for-service provider or in some cases by another managed care provider such as a prepaid health plan (see below). PCCM programs have become particularly prevalent in rural areas where there are few health plans. 
• Risk-based care. Health plans in this category provide care to enrollees for a monthly capitated fee. A plan may provide either comprehensive or limited healthcare services. Risk-based care plans include the following types: 
o A health insuring organization (HIO) is county-based and covers healthcare through payments to or arrangements with providers. HIOs are exempt from the rule requiring recipients to have a choice of at least two health plans. 
o A prepaid inpatient health plan (PIHP) does not have a comprehensive risk contract with Medicaid. It provides or arranges for the provision of inpatient hospital care or institutional services. 
o A prepaid ambulatory health plan (PAHP), like a PIHP, does not have a comprehensive risk contract. A PAHP provides or arranges for the provision of services other than inpatient hospital care or institutional services (such as dental care or mental healthcare). 
o A managed care organization (MCO) is either a federally qualified heath maintenance organization (HMO) or another public or private entity that provides comprehensive healthcare services comparable to those available to other Medicaid enrollees in the area. 
The BBA, in addition to allowing mandatory enrollment in managed care, eliminated the so-called 75/25 rule. This rule was designed to maintain quality by preventing an MCO from serving only Medicaid recipients—specifically, an MCO participating in Medicaid had to have at least 25 percent of its members enrolled through the private sector. The abolition of this rule resulted in the birth of so-called Medicaid MCOs, which are established specifically to serve Medicaid recipients and now play a major role in the managed care arena. 
Many Medicaid MCOs are operated by safety-net hospitals or clinics that have traditionally served low-income populations, but others are run by private corporations that have chosen to specialize in the Medicaid market. A few states now rely solely on Medicaid MCOs, but most use Medicaid MCOs, other MCOs, and other health plans. The choices offered by states vary widely and are often tied to geographic, political, and market considerations. And a recipient may be enrolled in more than one health plan, with different services provided by each. 
Quality Standards 
Another change made by the BBA was the establishment of quality standards and recipient protections for Medicaid health plans. These require plans to: 
• demonstrate adequate capacity and services,  meet certain quality assurance standards,  assure coverage of emergency services,  have a grievance process in place, and 
• ensure that mechanisms are in place to assess the quality and appropriateness of care to enrollees with special healthcare needs. 
States may use their own review process to ensure compliance with these standards, or they may use information obtained from a Medicare or private accreditation review. 
Challenges in Serving the Medicaid Population 
Medicaid recipients often have special needs, and health plans participating in Medicaid are required by law to take certain steps to address these needs. 
• Medicaid recipients have low incomes, and many low-income people have limited access to transportation. Plans must take into account the means of transportation ordinarily used by potential enrollees when developing their networks and considering the location of providers. 
• The Medicaid population is more culturally diverse than the general populace. A plan must make available enrollment materials in non-English languages prevalent in its service area, and it must make oral interpretation services available free-of-charge. Enrollees must be given information about plan providers who speak non-English languages. 
• Medicaid recipients often have more complex health and social needs than is typical of the commercial market.  
Another challenge to health plans participating in Medicaid relates to the periodic redetermination of a person’s Medicaid eligibility. A recipient must be reevaluated at least annually, and in some states this is done more frequently. Individuals must complete a form and submit documentation of certain eligibility factors, and many people lose their eligibility not because they no longer meet the criteria but because they fail to comply with administrative requirements. Some people let their eligibility lapse if they do not currently need medical care and reapply when they do. The result is “churning”— people moving in and out of Medicaid and in and out of their health plan, resulting in interruptions in the continuity of care and added administrative work.  
The Elderly and Disabled 
The elderly and disabled are only a small percentage of the Medicaid managed care population. This reflects the fact that they represent only about a quarter of the overall Medicaid population (most recipients are children).4  But another reason is the problems states have encountered establishing contracts with health plans to cover these categories, as plans entering into such contracts must manage the complex medical conditions inherent to older and disabled persons and meet their needs for specialty medical care and in some cases long-term care (nursing home care and home healthcare). As a result, some state Medicaid programs still have no managed care for the elderly and disabled, and the rest vary significantly in the plans available to these people.  
But while the elderly and disabled are only a minority of Medicaid recipients, because of their greater needs they account for over two-thirds of expenditures.5 So states seek to rein in spending for these categories and better manage their care, and in doing so they continue to experiment with new health plan concepts.  
The most successful model to date has been PACE (Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly). First established in San Francisco in the early 1970s, PACE is now offered in 27 states. It provides community-based long-term care at a capitated rate to frail persons age 55 and older who would otherwise need nursing home care. While some services are available in an individual’s home, most are provided at an adult day center. 
However, although PACE is a widely praised model, total enrollment is extremely small 
(less than 16,000 nationwide, half of this in only five states.)6 
Managed Care in CHIP 
As in Medicaid, in the Children’s Health Insurance Program managed care has become increasingly important, and most participants are enrolled in health plans. As with Medicaid, states may offer a PCCM plan, a risk-based care plan, or a combination. States have the option of offering CHIP enrollees a more restrictive benefit package than that provided to Medicaid recipients, provided it meets the standards described above. 
A significant difference between Medicaid and CHIP has to do with when coverage begins. A Medicaid recipient is covered as of the date of her application for Medicaid (or sometimes even a few months before), and her care is covered on a fee-for-service basis until her enrollment in a health plan is completed. In CHIP, on the other hand, coverage does not begin until the applicant has enrolled in a health plan, which may take a month or two after her CHIP application is approved. 
Premium Assistance in Medicaid and CHIP 
Instead of providing Medicaid and CHIP recipients with health coverage (either fee-forservice or managed care), a state has another option—premium assistance. Persons who qualify for Medicaid or CHIP but who also have access to employer-sponsored health insurance enroll in the employer plan, and the state pays the premium. (Often the premium for family members not eligible for Medicaid or CHIP is also paid.) The state pays cost-sharing (deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) for Medicaid-eligibles; CHIP-eligibles may have to pay some cost-sharing themselves, depending on their income. Finally, the state provides wrap coverage to pay expenses covered by Medicaid or CHIP but not by the private insurance.  
Premium assistance enables a state to ensure that a person has health coverage while spending considerably less than it would to provide coverage directly. Medicaid recipients may generally choose between premium assistance and Medicaid coverage; in some states premium assistance is mandatory for CHIP-eligibles. Premium assistance is commonly used and is often mandatory for Medicaid waiver populations (people who are not eligible for Medicaid under normal rules but to whom a state extends eligibility under a waiver, most commonly childless adults). 
Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program 
The Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program provides health coverage for full-time employees of the United States government, qualified retirees, and their spouses, dependents, and survivors. Under FEHB a large number of insurance companies and employee associations (including labor unions) offer health plans, and employees choose one. FEHB is operated by the federal Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and it is the largest employer-based group health insurance program in the world, providing coverage to more than 8 million people.7 
Federal employees can select from a large number of health plans offering a variety of coverage types, benefit packages, and premiums amounts. In recent years more than 250 plans have participated in FEHB, although the number available to each employee varies depending on where she lives. (While some plans operate nationally, others are regional.) Plans include traditional fee-for-service insurance policies, PPOs, HMOs, HMOs with a point-of-service (POS) feature, and high-deductible health plans.  
While benefit packages vary significantly, all FEHB plans must provide a minimal level of coverage that includes hospital care, surgical care, in-patient and out-patient care, obstetrical care, mental health and substance abuse care, and prescription drugs. All plans must also meet FEHB standards related to access to care, benefit design, and patient safety. Premiums vary according to plan type and benefit package. The federal government pays a portion (usually 72 or 75 percent), and the employee pays the rest. 
When a person is hired by the federal government, he chooses a plan from those available in his locality. A plan may not refuse to enroll him based on preexisting conditions, other health factors, age, or similar factors, and it may not impose a waiting period before coverage begins. Each year there is an open enrollment period during which federal workers can change plans if they wish.  
TRICARE 
TRICARE is the U.S. Department of Defense healthcare plan, serving members of the military and other uniformed services of the U.S. government, retirees, and their spouses and dependents. TRICARE uses a worldwide system of military hospitals and clinics as its main healthcare delivery system, but this is augmented by a network of civilian providers and facilities. TRICARE provides coverage to nearly 10 million people.8 

Congress funds TRICARE through the annual Department of Defense appropriation, and it can make changes to TRICARE benefits. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs (ASD/HA) and the TRICARE Management Authority (TMA) translate the annual appropriation and changes into policy. Contracted third-party administrators (three regional U.S. contractors and one international contractor) execute the policies to serve beneficiaries. The contractors also develop and maintain the network of civilian providers and facilities. 
Eligibility 
To qualify for TRICARE, a person must be associated with one of the seven uniformed services of the U.S. government: the four branches of the military (the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps) plus the Coast Guard, the Commissioned Corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service. Those eligible include the following: 
• active duty members of the services and activated members of the National Guard and the Reserves; 
• retirees of the services (honorably discharged after 20 or more years of service); and  the spouses and dependent children of the above. 
Service members honorably discharged after less than 20 years are not eligible for TRICARE, but they can receive care through the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs (CHAMPVA). 
Coverage 
TRICARE covers a broad range of healthcare services from both military and civilian providers. Participants choose from numerous plans based on their needs; the major options are summarized below: 
• TRICARE Standard and Extra—traditional fee-for-service health insurance with annual deductibles and two levels of cost-sharing. A member can receive care from an authorized non-network provider (the Standard option), but she pays higher cost-sharing than if she uses a TRICARE network provider (the Extra option).  
• TRICARE Prime—a traditional gatekeeper HMO with a point-of-service (POS) option. The beneficiary’s primary care provider (called a “primary care manager”) must work in a military facility or be a network provider. TRICARE Prime is required for active duty service members and activated reservists; it is an option for beneficiaries living in a “Prime Service Area” who are not eligible for Medicare. 
• US Family Health Plan—a version of TRICARE Prime. Beneficiaries do not receive care from military facilities, TRICARE network providers, or Medicare providers, but rather one of the six former Public Health Service healthcare providers. 
• TRICARE Reserve Select—a premium-based health plan for certain members of the Reserves and their families who are not eligible for FEHB. 
• TRICARE for Life—Medicare wrap-around coverage for individuals enrolled in Medicare Parts A and B. 
• TRICARE Dental Program—a voluntary traditional, premium-based dental insurance plan. It is free-of-charge for active duty service members and activated reservists.  
• TRICARE Pharmacy Program—tiered formulary prescription drug coverage provided through military facilities, network and non-network retail pharmacies, and mail-order pharmacies. 
TRICARE is always the payor of last resort. When a dependent or military retiree has health insurance from an employer or some other coverage, TRICARE pays benefits on the remaining balance only after the other insurance has paid. 
Premiums 
Active duty service members and activated reservists do not pay a premium for TRICARE, although they may be charged copayments for some benefits (such as prescription drugs). Most other TRICARE beneficiaries pay premiums. Premiums vary based on a person’s status (retiree or dependent) and the benefit package she chooses, and they range from nominal amounts to rates typical of the private-sector market. Retirees generally pay very low premiums; rate increases for them have been discussed many times over the past several years, but most in Congress are reluctant to take action that might be viewed as burdening veterans.  
Health Plan Features 
TRICARE has adopted health plan features such as referrals, authorization systems, and case management. In some locations military treatment facility (MTF) staff conduct medical management activities, while in others private-sector health plans are contracted to perform them. TRICARE medical management programs include preventive care, utilization management, disease management, case management, and care coordination. TRICARE has undertaken a variety of quality initiatives using performance measures, and it seeks appropriate accreditation for facilities. All health plan contractors are required to follow TRICARE quality management and utilization management procedures.  
The Effect of War 
Armed conflict has important affects on TRICARE: 
• Active duty physicians, nurses, and other medical providers are routinely deployed overseas. Since their military facility positions are then vacant, network providers are more heavily relied on to maintain the same access to care. 
• When reservists are called to active service, they and their families are added as TRICARE beneficiaries before, during, and for a period after deployment. 
• Significant care, both physical and emotional, is needed for those injured in war. The full impact of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is only now starting to be recognized.  
• The effect on families should not be ignored either—being separated from a family member in harm’s way for a prolonged period takes a severe mental and physical toll on spouses and children, increasing their need for medical services. 
Workers' Compensation 
Workers’ compensation is a state-mandated insurance program that provides benefits to cover healthcare costs and lost earnings for employees who suffer a work-related injury or illness. 
Every state has a workers' compensation law, and all states except Texas require employers to provide workers' compensation benefits. Most employers meet this requirement by purchasing workers’ compensation insurance from an insurer. But some larger employers obtain permission from the state to self-insure or purchase highdeductable policies under which the employer retains much of the risk. Self-insured employers often hire a third-party administrator to manage their program. 
Workers' compensation provides the same types of medical benefits as regular group health insurance, but there are some significant differences: 
• Workers’ compensation benefits are paid only if an injury or illness is workrelated. 
• Workers' compensation laws prohibit deductibles and copayments, and they do not specify an annual or lifetime dollar maximum on medical benefits. 
• While group health plans typically limit coverage to employees who meet eligibility requirements (for instance, excluding part-time workers), workers’ compensation laws in nearly every state mandate coverage for all employees. 
• In many states employers are prohibited from limiting provider choice.  
While in general group health plans provide benefits whether an injury or illness is workrelated or non-work-related, an injury or illness that is covered by workers’ compensation is typically excluded from health plan coverage. But health plans differ greatly in the extent to which they enforce this provision. Many plans make little or no effort to determine if a medical bill should have been covered by workers’ compensation, while a few are quite aggressive. If there is evidence the condition is occupational, plans often pay a submitted bill but then seek reimbursement from a workers’ compensation insurer. 
In addition to medical benefits, workers' compensation also provides disability income benefits, which replace most (typically two-thirds) of the earnings an employee loses while she is unable to work because of a work-related injury or illness. These DI benefits, known as workers' compensation indemnity benefits, account for about half of all workers' compensation expenses, with medical benefits making up the other half. All states provide for temporary DI benefits during a recovery period, and in all there is some form of benefits for permanent disabilities, although the nature of these permanent benefits varies greatly by state.  
Workers’ compensation is a “no fault” system. It is not required that an employer be at fault for an employee to be eligible for benefits—if an employee suffers from an illness or injury arising out of her employment, she is eligible. However, under state laws, workers’ compensation is an employee’s exclusive remedy—if an employer is at fault, the employee receives workers’ compensation, but she cannot obtain damages in a civil lawsuit against the employer. 
Managed Workers' Compensation  
Although total workers’ compensation costs have been trending downward for the last 10 to 15 years, workers’ compensation medical benefits have been increasing. In response to this, employers and insurers have applied managed care principles to workers’ compensation, including case management, selective networks, and utilization review. Some of these projects have reduced costs substantially.  
In general, the same approaches that help control health insurance costs also work in workers’ compensation. A potential problem arises in states that (as mentioned above) prohibit employers from limiting an employee’s choice of providers. But in these states many employers find that if they suggest a provider, employees will usually give her a try and continue with her if they are satisfied with the care and service they receive. 
To help employers and health plans comply with state laws designed to ensure quality care, accreditation standards have been developed for workers’ compensation PPOs and workers’ compensation utilization review organizations (UROs) by the American Accreditation HealthCare Commission/URAC. 
Notes 
                                                 
1  Kaiser State Health Facts at http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparecat.jsp?cat=4. 2  Congressional Research Service. March 18, 2009. “State Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP): A Brief Overview”. http://opencrs.com/document/R40444/ 3  Kaiser State Health Facts, Medicaid Managed Care Enrollees as a Percent of State Medicaid Enrollees, as of June 2009 http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparemaptable.jsp?ind=217&cat=4. 4  Kaiser State Health Facts, Distribution of Medicaid Payments by Enrollment Group, FY 2007 http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparemaptable.jsp?ind=858&cat=4  5  Ibid. 6  Ibid. 7
  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Federal Employees Health Benefits Program Handbook, page 2. http://www.opm.gov/insure/health/reference/handbook/febh01.asp 
8 As of March 2010, over 9.6 million. TRICARE. TRICARE Facts and Figures. 
http://www.tricare.mil/mediacenter/press_facts.aspx  

28 Ethics in Health Plans 
Objectives 
After completing this module, you will be able to: 
 name the five main ethical principles for health plans,   list at least four ways a health plan can promote an ethical corporate culture, and  describe the contribution an ethical task force can make to a health plan.. 
Ethics are the principles and values that guide the actions of an individual or a population when faced with questions of right and wrong. Ethics are not the same as laws (although both reflect the values of a community)—laws are enforceable in our court system, but ethics are not. Ethics are a concern of both individuals and organizations. 
We expect businesses not only to adhere to applicable laws but also to be ethical—to 
?do the right thing? as they conduct their activities. And the expectation of ethical behavior is especially high for organizations and individuals involved in healthcare or healthcare benefits—patients generally believe that those in the healthcare system will act in their (the patients’) best interest. Ethical questions arise under any healthcare system, but the nature of health plans creates particular issues. Health plans have multiple goals—accessibility, cost-effectiveness, and quality of care—and this creates the potential for a variety of ethical dilemmas, both for the health plan and for healthcare providers. 
Ethical Principles for Health Plans 
The five principles listed below are widely accepted as important foundations of ethics in healthcare and are applied to the activities of health plans. None of the principles is absolute; each is qualified by the others. Additionally, principles must always be considered and weighted in the context of the particular decision.  
• Autonomy. Health plans and their providers must respect the right of plan members to make decisions about the course of their lives.  
• Non-maleficence (not doing harm). Health plans and their providers must not do harm to their members. 
• Beneficence (doing good). Health plans and their providers must promote the good of both individual plan members and the members as a group.  
• Justice and equity. Health plans and their providers should allocate resources in a way that fairly distributes benefits and burdens among members.  
• Truth-telling and promise-keeping . Health plans and their providers must present information honestly and honor commitments. 
These principles are important criteria in ethical decision-making and are the underpinning of statements of rights, duties, and obligations. But there are other ethical concepts that merit consideration, the most important of which is virtue. Virtues are traits of character generated by community and tradition which dispose individuals to act honorably. Thus, virtues are those values that, when endorsed by an individual, create 
(in the words of Aristotle) ?a habitual disposition to act well.? A health plan can behave virtuously not only toward its members, but also toward the community at large—it can adopt corporate policies that encourage healthcare professionals to provide uncompensated care, it can respond to community needs in time of crisis (such as a natural disaster), and it can offer community outreach programs.  
A considered balance of ethical principles and virtues can promote better ethical decision-making than grounding decisions on either alone. In the same way that it is the foundation of all positive human relationships, virtuous behavior is inherent in the caring aspect of healthcare. An emphasis on caring is both unique and ethically imperative in the delivery of healthcare. 
As mentioned above, the multiple objectives of health plans may create ethical issues. Health plan strive to keep treatment costs down, for the benefit of each patient and also of the plan membership as a whole. Hoped for results are not only that the individual will receive appropriate, quality care but also that the entire membership will have affordable premiums and can be offered additional benefits. In other words, health plans are not exclusively focused on the treatment needs of individual patients but also are attentive to the needs of the group. In this way, ethical issues for health plans can be different than for healthcare providers, who tend to look at each individual patient in isolation.1 
An Ethical Corporate Culture 
Health plans can promote and support an ethical organizational environment in a number of ways: 
• encouraging honest, effective, and open communication between the plan, potential members, providers, members, and members’ families; 
• adopting and honoring statements of rights and responsibilities for members, providers, and the plan;  educating members about how the system works; 
• educating employees, providers, and members about ethical issues and the mechanisms that the plan has available for understanding and responding to those issues; 
• having policies and procedures in place to provide guidance to providers and members confronted with ethical issues, and involving providers and members in developing and implementing these policies and procedures; 
• developing and maintaining a culture where ethical considerations are integrated into decision-making at all levels; 
• ensuring that organizations with which the plan contracts have policies, procedures, and practices which are compatible with those of the plan; and 
• developing formalized methods for managing ethical conflicts. Some plans may choose to establish an ethics task force, while others may use bioethics consultants or network with other organizations that have expertise in this area.2 
The Ethics Task Force 
Some health plans have established a special committee or task force to consider ethical issues confronting the organization. The role and functions of an ethics task force are generally understood to be: 
• to provide a forum for the discussion of ethical issues,  to promote ethics education in the organization,  to generate and review policy statements related to ethics, and 
• to provide case consultation to providers, patients, and their families facing ethical questions or conflicts. 
Example: ABC Health Plan wants to strengthen ethics in the care of its members, so it establishes an ethics advisory group (EAG). The EAG includes a broad crosssection of those working for or interacting with the plan, including ABC staff, network physicians, consumers, company purchasers, brokers, and external health system and ethical leaders. EAG meetings are held to discuss issues brought to its attention. In reaching its conclusions the EAG has sought to provide transparency about its decisions and policies. 
One issue discussed by the EAG was whether ABC should pay benefits for an erectile dysfunction drug. Some members of the EAG felt that such drugs, although approved by the FDA, were a lifestyle choice and that the costs should be borne by individual members. Other members thought such drugs should be covered because they restore a basic bodily function. After discussion, the EAG suggested that limited benefits be paid for such drugs, and while acknowledging the need for cost containment within the context of the overall organizational budget.3 
This example shows how a task force’s ethical analysis and discussion can make a meaningful contribution to tough decision-making about allocating plan resources. This approach makes such decisions deliberative and transparent and includes a wide range of stakeholders. 
Healthcare Providers 
Health plans also have an obligation to take steps to ensure that the healthcare providers employed or contracted by them behave ethically. Physicians and other healthcare practitioners have traditionally taken an oath of commitment to serve humanity through their profession. Typically derived from the ancient Hippocratic Oath, these oaths are viewed as a statement of medical ethics and further reinforce the provider’s responsibility to place the patient’s health above other considerations. (See an example below.) 
Healthcare providers are supported in their efforts to act ethically by institutions of their professions. Medical schools, nursing schools, and other professional schools provide training in healthcare ethics. The American Medical Association (AMA) includes ethics groups that focus on ways to improve patient care and the health of the public by examining and promoting physician professionalism. The AMA produces a Code of Medical Ethics. Other professional organizations have their own ethics groups and codes of conduct. 
The Hippocratic Oath—A Modern Version4 
I swear to fulfill, to the best of my ability and judgment, this covenant: 
I will respect the hard-won scientific gains of those physicians in whose steps I walk and gladly share such knowledge as is mine with those who are to follow. 
I will apply, for the benefit of the sick, all measures that are required, avoiding those twin traps of overtreatment and therapeutic nihilism. 
I will remember that there is art to medicine as well as science, and that warmth, sympathy, and understanding may outweigh the surgeon's knife or the chemist's drug. 
I will not be ashamed to say "I know not," nor will I fail to call in my colleagues when the skills of another are needed for a patient's recovery. 
I will respect the privacy of my patients, for their problems are not disclosed to me that the world may know. Most especially must I tread with care in matters of life and death. If it is given me to save a life, all thanks. But it may also be within my power to take a life; this awesome responsibility must be faced with great humbleness and awareness of my own frailty. Above all, I must not play at God. 
I will remember that I do not treat a fever chart, a cancerous growth, but a sick human being, whose illness may affect the person's family and economic stability. My responsibility includes these related problems, if I am to care adequately for the sick. 
I will prevent disease whenever I can, for prevention is preferable to cure. 
I will remember that I remain a member of society, with special obligations to all my fellow human beings, those sound of mind and body as well as the infirm. 
If I do not violate this oath, may I enjoy life and art, respected while I live and remembered with affection thereafter. May I always act so as to preserve the finest traditions of my calling and may I long experience the joy of healing those who seek my help. 
Written in 1964 by Louis Lasagna, Academic Dean of the School of Medicine at Tufts University, and used in many medical schools today. 
 
 
Notes 
                                                 
1 Adapted from Joan D. Biblo, Myra J. Christopher, Linda Johnson, and Robert Lyman Potter, 
Ethical Issues in Managed Care: Guidelines for Clinicians and Recommendations to Accrediting Organizations (Kansas City, Missouri: Midwest Bioethics Center, 1995), 3–4, 8, 11–12. Used with permission. Thanks to Prime Health Foundation of Kansas City, Missouri, for a generous grant to underwrite this project. 2  Ibid. 3
 Sources: ?Confronting Trade-Offs in Health Care: Harvard Pilgrim Health Care’s Organizational 
Ethics Program,? Health Affairs, Volume 26, Number 4, July-August 2007, pages 1129-1134; and 
?A Conversation with James Sabin, MD: When Values Clash,? Managed Care, November 2009, www.managedcaremag.com/archives/0911/0911.qna_sabin.html 